Childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (CECTS, previously benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, BECTS) is the most common idiopathic focal epilepsy, accounting for approximately 10% of all childhood onset epilepsies (Astradsson et al., 1998; Berg and Rychlik, 2015; Callenbach et al., 2010; Camfield and Camfield, 2014; Larsson and Eeg-Olofsson, 2006). The epilepsy in CECTS is characterized by seizures and spikes arising independently from the left and right centrotemporal regions during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (Bouma et al., 1997; Callenbach et al., 2010; Carvill et al., 2013; Ross et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2013). Clinically, CECTS is now recognized as an epileptic encephalopathy, belonging to a group of developmental disorders characterized by abundant sleep-activated spikes that emerge alongside new cognitive and behavioral deficits in children (Berg et al., 2010; Carvill et al., 2013). In CECTS, children exhibit deficits of varying severity across all domains, with the most common difficulties noted in general intellectual functioning, fine motor coordination, processing speed, and speech-sound processing (Scheffer et al., 2017; Vannest et al., 2015; Wickens et al., 2017). Among these concerns, the largest deficits relate to consolidation of new information (Scheffer et al., 2017). Both the epilepsy and cognitive symptoms spontaneously resolve in CECTS across a range of ages, but always by late adolescence (Ross et al., 2019). 
Despite detailed clinical and electrophysiological observations of CECTS, the cause of this common epilepsy is unknown. The circadian nature of the abnormal electrophysiology consistently observed in CECTS suggests disruption to thalamocortical circuits (Gent et al., 2018; McCormick and Bal, 1997), a pathophysiology historically implicated in idiopathic generalized (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Williams, 1953), but not focal epilepsies. Sleep spindles, brief bursts of oscillatory sigma band (9-15 Hz) activity during NREM sleep, are generated by well-characterized thalamocortical circuits (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009). Similar to the epileptiform spikes in CECTS, sleep spindles can be focal and are most prominent in the Rolandic cortex (Andersen et al., 1967; Pinto et al., 2014). Prior work has observed that the thalamocortical circuits that generate spindles can be hijacked to support epileptiform spikes (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Clemente-Perez et al., 2017; Steriade, 2005). If disruptions to thalamocortical circuits underlie the pathological spikes in CECTS, these processes may also interfere with the generation of healthy spindles. 
 While sleep-activated interictal epileptiform spikes are a well-known electrophysiological signature of epileptic encephalopathies (Berg et al., 2010; Boor et al., 2007; Pataraia et al., 2008), efforts to link spike rate with cognitive and behavioral function in CECTS and related epileptic encephalopathies have shown inconsistent results (Bjørnæs et al., 2013; Sánchez Fernández et al., 2013; Vega et al., 2018). In contrast to the uncertain role of spikes in disrupting neurocognitive processes, sleep spindles are well-established as a mechanism of memory consolidation (Fogel and Smith, 2006; Nishida and Walker, 2007; Peters et al., 2008; Rasch et al., 2009; Rosanova and Ulrich, 2005; Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003; Tamaki et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2002), mediating the synaptic plasticity required for long-term potentiation during NREM sleep (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Rosanova and Ulrich, 2005; Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003). Spindle rate has also been found to correlate with general cognitive performance in children in both healthy and disease states (Farmer et al., 2018; Hahn et al., 2019; Wilhelm et al., 2012). Disruptions to spindle activity resulting from thalamocortical circuit dysfunction might therefore connect the cognitive impairments observed in children with active CECTS to a well-characterized pathophysiological mechanism.
In spite of the shared thalamocortical circuitry with spikes and the functional relevance to normal cognitive processes, the relationship between spindles and the cognitive symptoms in CECTS has not been investigated. We hypothesized that: (i) children with active, but not resolved, CECTS would have a focal disruption in spindle rate in the centrotemporal regions, (ii) spindle rate would be inversely related to spike rate, and (iii) spindle rate would correlate with neuropsychological performance. Evidence of a spindle disruption in CECTS would demonstrate indicate thalamocortical circuit dysfunction in this idiopathic focal epilepsy and provide a mechanistic explanation for the shared seizures and cognitive symptoms observed.
Although many automated detectors have been developed to quantify spindle activity (Warby et al., 2014), application of these methods to electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings from patients with epilepsy is limited due to the impact of epileptiform spikes on detector performance. Therefore, to test these hypotheses, we introduce and validate a novel automated approach to accurately detect spindles in the setting of epileptiform spikes. We then quantify spindles from NREM EEG recordings in children with CECTS at different stages of the disease and in control subjects, and compare these results to performance on neuropsychological tasks. In addition to providing new evidence of the thalamocortical pathophysiology of this disease, establishing the link between spindle dysfunction and cognitive deficits in CECTS introduces a novel mechanistic biomarker for cognitive risk in CECTS and opens the opportunity to target spindle deficits to improve cognitive symptoms in this common epileptic encephalopathy (Dreifuss et al., 1989; Fisher et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2016; Lustenberger et al., 2016; Manoach et al., 2004; Marshall et al., 2011; Thorn, Emily L. et al., 2018).
Although CECTS is a common developmental epilepsy, the pathophysiological mechanism leading to seizures and cognitive dysfunction in these children is unknown. Here, we show that focal spindle deficits are an electrophysiological feature of CECTS. We further show that the spindle deficits are present in the active but not resolved disease state and correlate with the neuropsychological deficits observed. These observations have several implications for our understanding of the role of the thalamocortical circuit in the pathophysiology of this disease, the role of abnormal spindles on cognitive dysfunction in CECTS, and novel opportunities for treatment. In addition, because children with CECTS overlap clinically and genetically with more severe epileptic encephalopathies (Gao et al., 2017; Kessi et al., 2018; Lemke et al., 2013; Strehlow et al., 2019), these findings may have broader applicability to these rare electroclinical epilepsy syndromes.
Prior studies have demonstrated subtle structural abnormalities involving the thalamus (Leal et al., 2018; Sánchez Fernández et al., 2012, 2017) and thalamocortical white matter in children with CECTS and related epileptic encephalopathies (Ciumas et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2014; Ostrowski et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2014). Our finding of spindle dysfunction in CECTS also implicates disruption to the thalamocortical circuit in this disease. Spindles are generated in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus, a diffuse web-like collection of GABAergic neurons which encase the other thalamic nuclei (Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005). These neurons project primarily to glutamatergic thalamocortical neurons, which entrain cortical areas to their sigma frequency rhythms (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009). The resulting rhythms - sleep spindles - are amplified and propagated through corticocortical and thalamocortical circuits. Corticothalamic neurons send glutamatergic inputs back to the thalamus, producing a feedback loop regulated primarily by GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission (Jacobsen et al., 2001). 
Our observation of an inverse relationship between spike and spindle rate during NREM sleep further supports observations that spikes and spindles may represent competitive processes that utilize the same thalamocortical circuitry (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009). In vitro, both spikes and spindles are recorded from single thalamic cells and thalamic slice preparations after different pharmacologic treatments (Huguenard and Prince, 1994; Kim et al., 1997; von Krosigk et al., 1993). In humans, thalamic and cortical activity measured with depth electrodes are phase locked during both spindles and spikes (Andersen et al., 1967; Williams, 1953). Although thalamocortical circuit dysfunction has previously been implicated in the pathophysiology of generalized seizures in absence epilepsy (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Maheshwari and Noebels, 2014; Williams, 1953), our observation of a focal spindle deficit in CECTS reveals that thalamocortical circuit can be focally disrupted in epilepsy. Consistent with this, prior work has demonstrated that distinct thalamocortical assemblages generate focal spindles (Andersen et al., 1967) and these distinct circuits can promote focal abnormalities (Clemente-Perez et al., 2017; Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016). In particular, sensorimotor thalamocortical circuits promote spatially distinct spindle populations (Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Nishida and Walker, 2007) and these sensorimotor spindles have been mechanistically tied to focal seizures in mouse models (Clemente-Perez et al., 2017). Our findings of disruptions specific to the centrotemporal regions in CECTS implicate either discrete thalamic nuclei (e.g. ventroanterior, ventrolateral, and ventroposterior nuclei (Andersen et al., 1967)) or discrete cell-types (e.g. parvalbumin expressing neurons that are mediolaterally distributed in the reticular nucleus of the thalamus (Clemente-Perez et al., 2017)) in this disease. 
Sensorimotor sleep spindles typically increase in frequency and rate over childhood (Hahn et al., 2019; Purcell et al., 2017), coincident with the age period that CECTS presents. The relationship between spindle rate and sleep-dependent consolidation of both procedural (Fogel and Smith, 2006; Nishida and Walker, 2007; Peters et al., 2008; Rasch et al., 2009; Tamaki et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2002) and declarative (Clemens et al., 2005, 2006; Schabus et al., 2008) memory is well-established in healthy adults and spindle dysfunction has been implicated as a mechanism for poor memory in aging (Pace-Schott and Spencer, 2015) and disease (Baran et al., 2018). Prior work has also demonstrated that general cognitive abilities and sleep dependent memory consolidation are associated with spindle rate in healthy neurotypical children and those with autism (Farmer et al., 2018; Hahn et al., 2019; Wilhelm et al., 2012). Here, we find that spindles are disrupted in children with a sleep-activated focal developmental epilepsy syndrome, CECTS, and correlate with general intelligence, fine motor dexterity, and processing speed. We did not find a relationship between spindle rate and phonological processing, which may reflect an alternate mechanism behind the language challenges in these children or the limitations of our approach. Given the short samples of sleep available, we included both stage 2 and 3 NREM sleep states in our analysis, though the rate of spindles in memory functions may differ between these states (Cox et al., 2012, 2017). In addition, we measured neuropsychological performance on a separate day from the EEG recordings. Future work, pairing spindle measures with same-day cognitive testing and including a measure of memory encoding may provide a more sensitive assay of the dynamic relationship between spindles and cognitive function in these children. In addition, utilizing a cross-sectional dataset of children at different stages of the disease, we found evidence for a transient spindle deficit. Confirmation that resolution of the spindle deficit coincides with resolving neuropsychological concerns will require a longitudinal study. 
Children with CECTS develop a range of mild to profound cognitive deficits concurrent with seizures (Ross et al., 2019; Tovia et al., 2011). The severe epileptic encephalopathies that present over the same ages include continuous spike and wave of sleep with encephalopathy and Landau Kleffner syndrome. These syndromes are characterized by interictal spikes in more than 85% of NREM sleep and permanent and progressive declines in cognitive function (Scheltens-de Boer, 2009). Supporting the phenotypic overlap between CECTS and these disorders, genetic studies reveal the same pathologic mutation can lead to continuous spike and wave of sleep with encephalopathy or CECTS (Gao et al., 2017; Kessi et al., 2018; Lemke et al., 2013; Strehlow et al., 2019). In addition, a prospective study reported that 6.6% of CECTS cases meet diagnostic criteria for continuous spike and wave of sleep with encephalopathy or Landau Kleffner syndrome (Tovia et al., 2011). Thus, our findings of a spindle deficit and thalamocortical circuit dysfunction in CECTS may provide new insights for these related but more severe epileptic encephalopathies.
Importantly, there are currently no available validated biomarkers to identify cognitive risk or proven strategies to treat cognitive dysfunction in children with CECTS or related epileptic encephalopathies. The development and validation of a robust spindle detector for use in patients with epileptiform spikes, and the identification of a spindle deficit in CECTS, opens new opportunities in both of these areas. Using a cross-sectional, case-control study design, we identified spindle deficits in children with active epilepsy and a correlation between spindle measures and cognitive function. Future work, using the LS or comparably performing detector, to identify normative spindle rate values in healthy children across ages may enable efficient identification of children with epilepsy who are at risk of cognitive deficits. Further, longitudinal assessments within children with CECTS may identify those at risk of cognitive regression, or conversely, those entering resolution of cognitive disease in CECTS. In addition, given the direct role that spindles play in memory consolidation, spindle deficits offer a novel treatment target (Manoach et al., 2020). Prior work has demonstrated that interventions that increase spindle activity result in improved sleep dependent memory consolidation (Kaestner et al., 2013; Leminen et al., 2017; Lustenberger et al., 2016; Mednick et al., 2013). Future work is required to explore the potential of spindle-promoting interventions to improve cognitive function in children with CECTS.
Evidence of spindle disruption in CECTS indicates thalamocortical circuit dysfunction in this idiopathic focal epilepsy and provides a common pathophysiology for the shared seizures and cognitive symptoms observed. Further, sleep spindles offer a mechanistic biomarker - and potential treatment target - of cognitive dysfunction in this common epileptic encephalopathy.
Brief bursts of high frequency oscillations (80-600 Hz) have been implicated as promising biomarkers for epileptic networks (Traub and Jefferys, 1994; Traub et al, 1996; Traub et al, 2001; Bragin et al, 1999; Worrell and Gotman, 2011). Many groups have reported ripple (80-200 Hz) and fast ripple (>200 Hz) activity in human intracranial electrode recordings and have shown that both of these high frequency oscillations localize to the seizure onset zone (Bragin et al, 1999; Worrell et al, 2008; Worrell et al., 2004; Jirsch et al, 2006; Jacobs et al, 2009; Wu et al, 2010), correlate with seizure occurrence (Ziljmans et al 2009), and with a lower threshold for after-discharges after electrical stimulation (Jacobs et al, 2010). Although activity in the fast ripple frequency band is generated by cortical regions that are too small to generate useful scalp EEG signals (Tau et al. 2007; Andrade-Valencia 2011), ripples have been successfully detected in non-invasive scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings, dramatically increasing the clinical relevance and potential of these biomarkers to include non-surgical patient populations. Ripples have been identified in the scalp EEG from children with electrical status epilepticus of sleep (Kobayashi et al., 2010); epileptic spasms (Kobayashi et al., 2004; Inoue et al., 2008) and focal epilepsy (Andrade-Valenca LP et al, 2011; Kobayashi et al, 2011; Andrade-Valenca et al., 2012; van Klink et al, 2016). Similar to reports from invasive recordings, ripple activity in non-invasive EEG colocalizes with the seizure onset zone (Andrade-Valenca LP et al, 2011; Andrade-Valenca et al., 2012) and correlates with severity of disease (van Klink et al., 2016).
Despite the promise that ripples hold for improved identification, localization, and tracking of the disease course in epilepsy, several challenges have impeded more aggressive application of these biomarkers in clinical epilepsy. First, it is difficult to separate pathologic from non-pathologic high frequency oscillations. Prior studies evaluating high frequency oscillations in scalp EEG have predominantly reported events in the ripple frequency range (Kobayashi et al., 2010; Kobayashi et al., 2004; Inoue et al, 2008; Andrade-Valenca et al, 2011). However, ripples have been observed in both epileptic and non-epileptic cortex (Bragin et al., 1999; Axmacher et al., 2008; Engel et al, 2009; Buzsaki and Lopes da Silva, 2012) and invasive recordings have shown that oscillations in the ripple band may not be as specific for epileptic cortex as fast ripples (>250 Hz; Bragin et al., 1999; Staba et al 2004; Staba et al 2007). 
Second, identification of high frequency oscillations on scalp EEG is manually laborious, limiting the size of the datasets that can be screened. Because these events are brief (50-150 ms) and have low amplitude, review of 10 minutes of data from a limited number of electrodes can take an expert reviewer up to 15 hours (Jacobs et al, 2008). Although several automated detectors have been developed for intracranial recordings (Zeljmann et al, 2011; Blanco et al, 2010; Gardner et al, 2007) non-invasive recordings introduce more artifacts, which result in significantly more false positive events (Von Ellenrieder et al, 2012), thereby limiting the practical application of this tool to smaller datasets. A more selective detector of ripple events would facilitate investigation of larger datasets, enabling a better understanding of how fast oscillations track with and contribute to disease and normal physiology. 
Both intracranial and non-invasive recordings have demonstrated that the majority of ripple and fast ripple events in epileptiform cortex co-occur with interictal epileptiform discharges or “spikes” (Urrestarazu et al. 2007; von Ellenreider et al, 2012; Jacobs et al, 2008; Klink et al, 2016). Population based studies have demonstrated that interictal spikes are highly specific for epilepsy, present in only 0.5-2.4% of the general population (Eeg-Olofson et al., 1971; Bennet 1967). Here we propose to detect the co-occurrence of ripples and spikes in the scalp EEG using a semi-automated spike-ripple detector. This approach leverages the well-characterized signal features of ripples with the specificity of the interictal spike to improve the efficiency of identification and quantification of ripples in non-invasive scalp EEG recordings. We show that the spike-ripple detector performs well in simulations and human non-invasive EEG data from ten patients with benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes. Compared to the standard manual detection method, the proposed semi-automated procedure for spike-ripple detection has a high positive predictive value and low false positive rate. 
Brief high frequency oscillations observed in human brain voltage activity are incompletely understood. Experimental observations in animal models suggest that these fast oscillations reflect rapid inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) on the somata of pyramidal cells during simultaneous excitation of the pyramidal cells and surrounding interneurons (Bragin et al., 1999). An alternative mechanism - axo-axonal gap junctions between pyramidal cells - has also been proposed to support ripple band activity (Traub et al., 2001; Simon et al., 2014). Ripple oscillations have been observed in healthy tissue and may reflect normal physiological processes that contribute to the synaptic remodeling that underlies information processing, memory transference and consolidation (Buzsaki and Silva, 2012). Conversely, when coupled to pathologic interictal epileptiform discharges, ripple events may reflect a malignant hijacking of these powerful processes of neuronal synchronization and thereby both reflect and contribute to the underlying disease (Bragin et al., 1999).
Robust coupling between sharp wave discharges and ripples has been observed in animal and human invasive recordings (Ylinen et al., 1995; Buzsaki 2012) and in scalp EEG (Kobayashi, et al., 2010; von Ellenreider et al., 2012; Jacobs et al., 2008; Klink et al., 2016). Although it is compelling to compare scalp spike-ripple events to intracranial spike-ripple events, these signals appear to behave differently and may represent altered propagation of shared generators (von Ellenreider et al., 2014) or different underlying mechanisms (Worrell G and Gotman J, 2011). Although irregular oscillations have been observed in ripples recorded intracranially (de la Prida, et al., 2015), we limit the ripple oscillations to small Fano factors to match previous descriptions of spike-ripple oscillations as sinusoidal activity in scalp EEG (von Ellenrieder et al., 2012) and minimize false detection, as irregular oscillations have been noted to reflect artifact (Andrade-Valenca et al., 2011). We also required that the onset of the ripple precede the large voltage peak as this was observed in our data and consistent with the examples of scalp spike-ripples shown in prior publications (Kobayashi et al., 2011; von Ellenrieder et al., 2012; van Klink et al., 2016). The mechanisms of these empirical observations remain unclear. Paroxysmal depolarizing shifts (PDS) lasting approximately 100-500 ms have been observed to coincide with interictal discharges and are thought to directly reflect summated excitatory postsynaptic potentials (Ayala et al., 1973). These depolarizing shifts are thought to be circumscribed by an “inhibitory surround” that, in some spike events, may generate the pattern of inhibitory potentials that create ripple activity. 
Detection of ripple events during interictal spikes raises some methodological issues. Scalp EEG spike ripples have been observed to occur between 93-235 Hz (Kobayashi et al., 2011; van Klink et al., 2016). If a low pass filter is applied during data collection or analysis, it should be above this range. Similarly, the sampling rate must be sufficient to reliably expose the signals of interest; the minimum sampling rate reported in the literature for visual analysis of spike ripples is 500 Hz (Kobayashi et al., 2011), consistent with the performance of our detector, as most spike-ripples occur < 150 Hz. We find that variations in montage choice, electrode density, and state of consciousness do not qualitatively impact detector performance; however, the detector had the best performance when high-density recordings with a high sampling rate were used. We also note that high pass filtering of EEG data with rapid voltage changes, such as seen in epileptiform spikes, can introduce ringing artifacts that appear as ripples or fast oscillations (Benar et al., 2010; de la Prida et al., 2015; Kramer et al., 2008). We thus applied several conservative steps to mitigate this possible confound. First, in our manual validation of candidate spike-ripple events, we required a fast oscillation be visible on the unfiltered data. Second, we tested our detector in simulations that included large, rapid changes in voltage, such as triangle waves as well as simulated epileptiform discharges interpolated from empirical data with and without superimposed oscillatory ripple events. Finally, we tested our detector using empirical human data where ripples were and were not observed. In the clinical data and in each of the simulated scenarios, the detector performs with high positive predictive value and low false detection rate.  
By relying on the presence of interictal spikes, the proposed method is limited to the sensitivity of interictal spikes for epileptiform processes. In longer recordings, interictal discharges are reported in 81% of people with epilepsy, and sensitivity is further increased using provocative procedures and capturing sleep (Walczak et al., 1993; Pillai and Sperling, 2006). Some of the missed cases are due to the limitation of the scalp EEG in accessing deep or small epileptogenic regions; ripple identification on scalp EEG would suffer the same challenge and is thus not expected to improve substantially with more thorough data review. However, a previous study showed that 63% of manually identified scalp high frequency oscillations identified were concurrent with spikes (Jacobs et al., 2008). A less specific semi-automated fast oscillation detection method that did not rely on spikes for fast oscillation detection reported that 50-70% of fast oscillations occur at the same time as a spike (von Ellenreider et al., 2012). Thus, while our method has been developed to detect the majority of ripple events, those events that occur between spikes will be missed. Reducing the number of automated detections makes the subsequent validation through visual inspection tractable for large data sets. Ideally, this reduction would occur by reducing the false positive rate while preserving or improving the positive predictive value.  
The proposed method still requires the manual validation of spike-ripple events, a subjective procedure which may introduce bias and reduce reliability. To test for this here, we de-identified and scrambled the EEG data prior to expert review, and found high intra-rater reliability. This result suggests that the candidate spike-ripple events detected by the proposed method are easily validated or refuted. We note that this procedure is only tractable when the number of candidate events is small, as is the case here when only spikes that occur with ripples are detected. Future work will focus on further automating these techniques to eliminate subjective bias and labor introduced by manual review, and applying this approach to a larger patient population to further test the utility of this method.
Here we introduce a semi-automated spike-ripple detector with the goal of facilitating efficient exploration of large datasets including high-density electrode sampling as well as longer duration recordings. Evaluation of larger datasets is essential to further investigate the sensitivity and specificity of this biomarker to predict seizure risk in patients with spikes. Furthermore, rapid identification and characterization of pathological ripples in non-invasive EEG data facilitates exploration of the relationship between these events and clinical consequences in a wide variety of clinical scenarios, including how they relate to epileptogenesis and other disease related morbidities often present in epilepsy, such as sleep, attentional, behavioral, and memory difficulties (Worrell and Gotman, 2011; Engel, 2011).
Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) is a common childhood epilepsy syndrome that predominantly affects boys and is characterized by self-limited focal seizures arising from the perirolandic cortex and fine motor abnormalities. Concurrent with the age-specific presentation of this syndrome, the brain undergoes a developmentally-choreographed sequence of white matter microstructural changes, including the maturation of association u-fibers abutting the cortex. These short fibers directly mediate local cortico-cortical communication and provide an age-sensitive structural substrate that could support a focal disease process. To test this hypothesis, we evaluated white matter microstructure in regions corresponding to u-fibers underlying the perirolandic seizure onset zone in children with BECTS compared to healthy control children. To verify the spatial specificity of these features, we characterized global u-fiber and deep white matter properties in these children. We further explored the characteristics of the perirolandic white matter in relation to fine motor performance on the Grooved Pegboard task, gender, and cortical abnormalities observed on EEG. Children with BECTS (n=20) and healthy controls (n=14) underwent multimodal testing with high resolution MRI including DTI sequences with 64 diffusion encoding directions, sleep EEG recordings, and fine motor assessment. We compared white matter microstructural characteristics (axial, radial, and mean diffusivity, and fractional anisotropy) between groups in each region. We found distinct abnormalities corresponding to the perirolandic u-fiber regions, with increased axial, radial, and mean diffusivity and fractional anisotropy values in children with BECTS (p=0.039, p=0.035, p=0.042, and p=0.017, respectively). Increased fractional anisotropy in this region, which could reflect decreased integrity of crossing sensorimotor u-fibers, correlated with inferior fine motor performance (p=0.029). There were gender-specific differences in white matter microstructure in the perirolandic region such that BECTS males and females and healthy males have higher diffusion and fractional anisotropy values than healthy females (p≤0.035 for all measures), suggesting that typical patterns of white matter development may disproportionately predispose boys to BECTS. There was no relationship between perirolandic white matter microstructure and seizure course or epileptiform burden. There were no differences in diffusivity or fractional anisotropy in u-fiber regions outside of the perirolandic region between groups. Deep white matter showed a diffuse increase in radial diffusivity and decrease in fractional anisotropy in BECTS, consistent with a global delay in white matter maturation (p=0.022 and p=0.027). These data provide evidence that atypical maturation of white matter microstructure is a basic feature in BECTS and may contribute to the clinical comorbidities observed in this disorder.
Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) is a common childhood epilepsy syndrome, characterized by a self-limited focal seizure disorder arising from the perirolandic cortex and fine motor abnormalities. BECTS represents 10-15% of epilepsies affecting children under the age of 15, with a 1.5:1 preponderance among males (Astradsson et al., 1998; Berg et al., 1999; Callenbach et al., 2010; Camfield et al., 2014; Larsson & Eeg-Olofsson, 2006). The majority of children experience their first seizure during elementary school years and all patients have resolution of their epilepsy by age 16 years (Berg et al., 2014; Callenbach et al., 2010; Camfield et al., 2014; Panayiotopoulos et al., 2008). Concurrent with the age-specific presentation of this epilepsy syndrome, the brain undergoes a developmentally choreographed sequence of white matter microstructural changes across childhood and adolescence (Hagmann et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2015; Tamnes et al., 2010; Wierenga et al., 2016). Although brain developmental processes have long been favored as fundamental to the presentation and progression of childhood epilepsy (Ben-Ari, 2006; Holmes, Milh, & Dulac, 2012), the precise relationship between white matter microstructure and clinical symptoms remains poorly understood. Given the stereotyped focal presentation of BECTS, a better understanding of focal white matter microstructural features would enable identification of the anatomical substrate that supports seizure susceptibility and fine motor abnormalities in these children.
Prior work evaluating white matter abnormalities in BECTS have suggested abnormalities near the perirolandic cortex (Ciumas et al., 2014; S. E. Kim et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2014). These studies have relied on exploratory voxel-wise examination of the whole brain white matter and the reported abnormalities have been complex, involving multiple fragmented subcortical regions and inconsistent findings across subjects and studies (Ciumas et al., 2014; S. E. Kim et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2014). Recent studies of normal white matter development have shown that local association u-fibers, including those adjoining the perirolandic cortex, mature during childhood and adolescence (Oyefiade et al., 2018). As these short association fibers directly mediate local cortico-cortical communication, they provide an age-sensitive focal substrate that could support focal developmental epilepsy.
To test the relationship between focal white matter organization and disease in BECTS, we evaluate a priori a region of interest (ROI) corresponding to the region of u-fibers underlying the seizure onset zone in children with BECTS compared to healthy control (HC) subjects. To verify the spatial specificity of these features, we evaluate u-fiber ROIs outside of the seizure onset zone and deep white matter properties in these children. We then explore the abnormalities observed in the perirolandic white matter in relation to fine motor performance on the Grooved Pegboard task, gender, and the cortical abnormalities observed on EEG. 
Several unique age specific developmental epilepsy syndromes have been characterized (Berg et al., 2010) and are postulated to relate to structural risk factors associated with normal brain maturation (Andersen, 2003; Hermann et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2015; Overvliet et al., 2013; Pardoe et al., 2013). Here we evaluated white matter adjacent to the seizure onset zone in a common focal developmental epilepsy syndrome, BECTS, where all children have a consistent seizure onset zone localized to the perirolandic cortex. We found distinct abnormalities in the white matter corresponding to the region of perirolandic u-fibers in children with BECTS. The abnormalities observed correlate with inferior fine motor performance and may represent a delay in white matter developmental processes expected in this age group. We also found gender-specific differences in perirolandic u-fiber microstructure suggesting that the typical male pattern of white matter development in this region may predispose boys to BECTS. Finally, we also found separate, diffuse abnormalities in deep white matter microstructure in children with BECTS compared to HCs. To our knowledge, this is the first study to provide clear and compelling evidence that unique white matter microstructural abnormalities localize to the seizure onset zone in children with BECTS, atop a manifold of white matter microstructural abnormalities present diffusely throughout the brain. Our exploratory results further show that the focal white matter abnormalities may underlie the gender segregation and fine motor comorbidities observed in this epilepsy syndrome. Together, these data provide evidence that atypical maturation of white matter microstructure is a structural feature of developmental epilepsy and may contribute to the clinical symptoms observed in this disorder.
Our findings of increased deep white matter RD and reduced FA in BECTS are consistent with prior studies in BECTS (Besseling et al., 2013; Ciumas et al., 2014; Widjaja et al., 2013) and are consistent with a delay in the typical maturation process observed in white matter across childhood (Ashtari et al., 2007; Tamnes et al., 2010). Our findings of focal abnormalities in the white matter adjacent to the seizure onset zone are more prominent and specific than prior work evaluating white matter in BECTS, likely because prior work utilized whole brain and lobar voxel-wise techniques and did not specifically focus on diffusion properties of white matter adjacent to the seizure onset zone (Besseling et al., 2013; Ciumas et al., 2014; Widjaja et al., 2013). Taken together, these findings suggest that children with BECTS have delayed or aberrant maturation of both deep white matter including long distance fibers, as well as short association u-fibers adjacent to the seizure onset zone compared to HCs. Importantly, these findings provide evidence that childhood focal epilepsy is not simply a physiological disorder, but also involves focal structural abnormalities that can be detected using modern neuroimaging techniques.
We found that the focal white matter abnormalities present in the perirolandic region correlate with fine sensorimotor performance in children with BECTS. This result suggests that localized abnormalities in white matter maturation may contribute to the specific comorbid developmental deficiencies present in BECTS and other developmental epilepsy syndromes (Kim et al., 2014; Vannest et al., 2015; Widjaja et al., 2013). Prior work has primarily focused on relating neurocognitive comorbidities in epilepsy to the physiological abnormalities present in children with epilepsy, such as spike rate (Xiao et al., 2016), functional connectivity from EEG (van Mierlo et al., 2014) or rhythm abnormalities (Brindley et al., 2016; Koelewijn et al., 2015). Our results suggest that focal abnormalities in the relevant structural association networks could be responsible for specific neurocognitive features present in epilepsy patients, independent of physiological features. Further, the diffusion abnormalities we observed could be consistent with a delay in the white matter maturation process in these children as opposed to a permanent pathological aberrant. In this case, further maturation over time would be expected to lead to disease resolution, as is observed in BECTS and other self-limited childhood epilepsy syndromes. Future, longitudinal work is required to determine whether the white matter abnormalities and concomitant fine motor difficulties observed in these children ultimately resolve, or whether disease resolution is related to more complex compensatory mechanisms.
In addition to structural developmental changes in the brain, genetic contributions are expected to contribute to seizure risk in BECTS. One large study recently found that 20% of atypical BECTS cases had a mutation in the GRIN2A gene, encoding an NMDA receptor (Lesca et al., 2013). However, previous work in monozygotic twins has reported complete discordance in BECTS (Vadlamudi et al., 2006, 2014). Furthermore, although EEG abnormalities appear to be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion in focal childhood epilepsy (Doose, 1997; Heijbel et al., 1975), seizure risk is not, and further risk factors must therefore be contributing to the disease process. Identifying structural correlates to the disease may enable better identification of those at risk beyond genetic susceptibility. Supporting a relative genetic contribution, here we found differences in white matter microstructure between healthy boys and girls, where boys’ white matter showed less mature diffusion properties in the perirolandic region. Among children with BECTS, both boys and girls had diffusion values consistent with immature white matter, suggesting that a relative delay in white matter maturation in the perirolandic region may be a risk factor for BECTS, and further contribute to the male gender prevalence seen in this disease. 
Notably, we did not find a relationship between white matter microstructural changes and spike rate or epilepsy course. These results suggest that although white matter maturation can be driven by cortical activity (Bengtsson et al., 2005; Markham & Greenough, 2004), the white matter changes observed here are likely not directly caused by the epileptiform process. We also found that prolonged periods of seizure freedom, corresponding to the resolution of epilepsy, did not correlate directly with the resolution of white matter microstructural abnormalities. This could be because white matter findings are independent of the epileptiform process, maturational changes require a longer duration seizure free than we observed in our cohort, or resolution of epilepsy in children with BECTS involves more complex compensatory mechanisms. We also note that our ROIs may not have been specific enough to reflect the epileptiform cortex. Here, we included white matter adjacent to the entire perirolandic cortex, thus best positioned to correspond to sensorimotor features of this disease. The seizure onset zone in BECTS is likely constrained to the inferior portion of this cortex, near the face and hand representation areas (Huiskamp et al., 2004).  Studies utilizing source imaging and co-localization techniques to evaluate white matter characteristics corresponding to patient specific epileptic foci may be better able to identify a relationship between white matter and epilepsy features.
This study reveals unique, focal abnormalities in white matter microstructure that correspond with the seizure onset zone and sensorimotor deficits in children with BECTS. These results offer new insights into the pathological process underlying focal childhood epilepsy and the relationship between white matter microstructure and a common comorbidity present in these children. Future work targeting specific white matter paths that may underlie other common neurocognitive deficits seen in children with BECTS, such as attentional and language disorders, can further clarify the relationship between cortical connectivity and epilepsy comorbidities. In addition, the relationship between white matter integrity and the seizures and abnormal cortical physiology present in these children remains poorly understood. Future studies evaluating the longitudinal changes that occur over the course of this disease may provide insight into the maturational or compensatory processes that underlie seizure risk and contribute to disease resolution. Overall, by validating the long-held intuition that focal childhood epilepsy relates to abnormalities in the maturation of structural brain networks, this work contributes to a more complete understanding of the multifaceted disease process in epilepsy.
Epilepsy is the world’s most prominent serious brain disorder, affecting nearly 50 million people worldwide. For nearly one-third of patients, seizures remain poorly controlled despite maximal medical management. In these patients, seizures often arise from a localized brain region, making neurosurgical intervention an effective treatment option. When successful, such interventions provide cure from seizures, and also prevent or reverse the disabling psychosocial and developmental consequences of uncontrolled seizures. Critical to successful intervention is accurate identification of the core tissue responsible for generating seizures (i.e., the epileptogenic zone). This tissue can then be surgically removed or treated with neurostimulation. The most common approach to identify the epileptogenic zone is continuous monitoring of a patient’s brain voltage activity for seizures. However, because seizures are infrequent, this approach is expensive, time consuming, and unpleasant for patients. Moreover, this approach often fails to identify the epileptogenic zone, resulting in unsuccessful neurosurgical treatment. To address this, biomarkers of the epileptogenic zone that manifest between seizures are required. Two such biomarkers have been proposed: (i) interictal discharges or spikes, and (ii) high frequency oscillations or ripples. While both signals have been extensively studied, neither accurately delimits the epileptogenic zone. Spikes are specific for epilepsy, but too spatially diffuse to identify the epileptogenic zone. Ripples are spatially focal, but represent both pathologic and physiologic processes. These limitations impede targeting neurosurgical treatment for epilepsy, and keep the process of identifying optimal neurostimulation patterns inefficient and ad hoc. Identification of an improved biomarker - to target and assess epilepsy treatment - is required. To that end, we propose a multidisciplinary translational analysis pipeline that combines clinical observations in humans, single neuron observations in animal models, and rapid exploration of candidate mechanisms in computational models. We focus on the simultaneous occurrence of a spike and ripple (a “spike-ripple”) as an improved biomarker for neurosurgical treatment of epilepsy. Spike-ripples occur commonly in patients with epilepsy, improve the spatial specificity of spikes for the epileptogenic zone, and disentangle physiologic from pathologic ripples. We propose three major aims pursued by an interdisciplinary team with expertise in clinical medicine, animal experiments, modeling, and statistics. We will: (i) develop a fully automated spike-ripple detector and compare its clinical utility to spikes and ripples alone, (ii) identify candidate biological mechanisms that support spike-ripples by developing animal and computational models of epilepsy, and (iii) develop neurostimulation protocols to disrupt spike-ripples. Completion of these Aims will represent significant progress towards resolving fundamental questions in modern epilepsy research, an understanding of mechanisms in the core epileptogenic network that generate spike-ripples, and a principled approach to neurostimulation to focally disrupt these pathologic networks at their source.
2.a. Significance: The burden and challenge of epilepsy. Epilepsy is the world’s most common, serious brain disorder, affecting nearly 50 million people worldwide (World Health Organization, 2019), and accounting for 1% of the global burden of disease (Engel, 2011; Engel et al., 2003). For one-third of epilepsy patients (Kwan and Brodie, 2000), seizures remain poorly controlled despite maximal medical management, with significant financial impact and negative effects on health and quality of life (Schuele and Lüders, 2008). Moreover, this subset of patients with medication refractory epilepsy account for 80% of the total cost of epilepsy (Engel, 2011) ($4 billion/year in the US (Murray et al., 1996)). For these patients, up to 50% have focal epilepsy, where seizures arise from a localized region in the brain, and neurosurgical intervention is the most effective treatment option (Engel et al., 2003; Ryvlin and Rheims, 2008). In addition to providing cure from seizures, successful surgical intervention also prevents or reverses the disabling psychosocial and developmental consequences of uncontrolled seizures (Davidson and Falconer, 1975). Rapid advances in brain stimulation (Lin and Wang, 2017) in the last decade, in which focused electrical stimulation is used to modulate pathologic cortical networks, now offer new promise to patients who are either not candidates for traditional resective surgery or prefer less invasive neurosurgical options (Kwon et al., 2018), and provide potential cure to a larger pool of medication refractory epilepsy patients. With multiple neurosurgical approaches now available, progress in epilepsy care is currently hampered by inadequate understanding of how best to (1) isolate, and (2) disrupt a patient’s epileptogenic network. 

Localizing epileptogenic tissue remains a significant challenge. For each of the available neurosurgical approaches, accurate identification of the pathologic brain tissue responsible for generating the seizures, the epileptogenic zone (EZ), is critical for a successful outcome. The most common approach to identify the EZ is to continuously record a patient’s brain voltage activity and analyze seizure onsets, provoked through sleep deprivation and medication tapers (Engel Jr., 1987). However, in addition to being expensive, time consuming, and unpleasant for patients, this approach has proven inaccurate; following surgical resections to treat focal epilepsy, seizures recur in 20-70% of patients (Cohen-Gadol et al., 2006; Jeha et al., 2007; Rosenow and Lüders, 2001; Spencer and Huh, 2008; Wetjen et al., 2009). Identification of an improved biomarker for the EZ is a high priority goal for the epilepsy community (Engel, 2011) to improved targeting and therefore success of neurosurgical interventions.

Leading biomarkers of epileptogenic tissue are improved in combination. In addition to generating rare seizures, epileptogenic tissue also produces more frequent bursts of abnormal interictal activity between seizures (Ayala et al., 1973; Bragin et al., 1999, 2002a, 2002b; Engel Jr et al., 2009; Gloor, 1975; Gotman, 2010; Jacobs et al., 2008; Urrestarazu et al., 2006, 2007; Worrell and Gotman, 2011), the hallmark of which are spikes and ripples (Fig 1, and defined below) (Jacob et al., 2019; Worrell and Gotman, 2011). Interictal biomarkers hold tremendous promise to better identify the EZ (Jacobs et al., 2008, 2009a, 2010; Klimes et al., 2019; van Klink et al., 2014; Modur et al., 2011; Okanishi et al., 2014; Otárula et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2010), and provide rapid assessment of intervention efficacy (Lundstrom et al., 2016, 2019; Staba et al., 2014; Westin et al., 2019); spikes and ripples can be measured with as little as 10 minutes of data, as opposed to days or weeks of continuous recordings required to observe a seizure (Jacobs et al., 2018; Westin et al., 2019; Worrell and Gotman, 2011). In addition, these interictal biomarkers are postulated to contribute to both seizure generation (Allen et al., 1992; Avoli and de Curtis, 2011; Barbarosie and Avoli, 1997; Chang et al., 2018; Fisher et al., 1992; Grenier et al., 2003; Guignard et al., 2012; Huberfeld et al., 2011; Karoly et al., 2016; Traub et al., 2001; Urrestarazu et al., 2006; Worrell et al., 2004) and epileptogenesis (Bragin et al., 2000, 2002c; Despouy et al., 2019; Staba et al., 2014; Worrell et al., 2008). Spikes and ripples have both been extensively studied as biomarkers for the EZ, but targeting each individually has not resulted in improved surgical outcomes (Jacobs et al., 2018; Lundstrom et al., 2019; Staba et al., 2014), due to well-characterized limitations. Several observations (Jacobs et al., 2018; Klink et al., 2016; van Klink et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2013, 2017; Weiss et al., 2016) - including our previous work (Chu et al., 2017; Kramer et al., 2019) - suggest that the co-occurrence of these interictal events provides an improved biomarker of the EZ compared to either feature alone. 

Interictal spikes are specific for epilepsy but spatially diffuse. Spikes are large amplitude (~100 µV), long lasting (~100 ms) deviations in the brain’s voltage activity (Fig 1a) that occur between seizures and are a hallmark of epilepsy with high specificity(Ayala et al., 1973; Engel, 2012; Sabolek et al., 2012; Staley and Dudek, 2006; Worrell and Gotman, 2011). Interictal spikes occur much more frequently than seizures, and result from the synchronous discharges of large enough neuronal populations to manifest in the scalp EEG (Sabolek et al., 2012; Worrell et al., 2002), estimated to involve a minimum of 10 cm2 of cortical tissue (Tao et al., 2007). Spikes are routinely observed in the EZ and spike propagation patterns correlate with the seizure network (Alarcon et al., 1997; Bautista et al., 1999; Cendes et al., 1996; Hufnagel et al., 2000; Jacobs et al., 2008; Lai et al., 2007; Lundstrom et al., 2019; Ray et al., 2007; Tomlinson et al., 2016). However, given the spatially diffuse nature of this large signal, spikes are also commonly observed outside of the EZ and widely accepted as insufficient to accurately guide surgical interventions, including resection(Hufnagel et al., 2000; Jacobs et al., 2008; Marsh et al., 2010; Worrell and Gotman, 2011) or stimulation (Kinoshita et al., 2004, 2005; Kossoff et al., 2004; Lundstrom et al., 2019; Velasco et al., 2000; Yamamoto et al., 2002). 

Interictal ripples are spatially focal but not specific for epilepsy. Ripples are low amplitude (~0.1 µV), high frequency (80-250 Hz), short (~10 ms), focal (~1 cm2) electrophysiological events (Fig 1b) (Buzsáki, 2015; Frauscher et al., 2017). Ripples have been proposed as an improved biomarker for the EZ compared to spikes (Jacobs et al., 2008, 2009a, 2010; Klimes et al., 2019; van Klink et al., 2014; Modur et al., 2011; Okanishi et al., 2014; Otárula et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2010), and the association between ripples and epileptic brain tissue is, arguably, one of the major recent discoveries in epilepsy research (Jiruska et al., 2017a; Worrell and Gotman, 2011; Worrell et al., 2012). However, two large multicenter studies recently determined that targeting ripples in neurosurgical interventions does not reliably improve seizure outcome(Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). The failure of ripples to accurately identify the EZ was attributed to two reasons. First, ripples have poor specificity to epileptic tissue; “physiological ripples” are an essential feature of normal cognitive processes (Engel Jr et al., 2009) and cannot be distinguished from the “pathologic ripples” of epilepsy based on duration, amplitude, or frequency content (Cimbalnik et al., 2018; Gliske et al., 2018; Matsumoto et al., 2013). A fundamental question that remains unanswered is how to distinguish physiological ripples that support brain function from pathological ripples that manifest in the EZ (Buzsáki, 2015; Cimbalnik et al., 2016; Ellenrieder et al., 2016; von Ellenrieder et al., 2017; Engel Jr et al., 2009; Hoeller et al., 2015; Hussain et al., 2016; Jacobs et al., 2012, 2018; Kerber et al., 2014; Matsumoto et al., 2013). Second, current techniques do not reliably detect pathologic ripples. Visual inspection, the current gold-standard to identify ripples, is prohibitively time consuming and introduces reviewer bias, while automated approaches have poor specificity to detect these brief, low amplitude events (Cimbalnik et al., 2018; von Ellenrieder et al., 2012; Zelmann et al., 2012). These limitations hinder clinical application and an important practical challenge remains: how to accurately detect these small, brief events in clinical data (Chu et al., 2017). 

Spike-ripples are specific for the EZ. Early, promising observations of ripples as a reliable biomarker for the EZ focused on recordings from electrode channels that also demonstrated interictal spikes (Jacobs et al., 2008; Jirsch et al., 2006; Staba et al., 2002, 2004; Urrestarazu et al., 2006, 2007). However, subsequent investigations pursued ripples as a biomarker independent of spikes (Cimbalnik et al., 2018; Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018; Worrell et al., 2008). To improve the pathologic and spatial specificity of these biomarkers for the EZ, we have focused our efforts on intentionally combining spike and ripple events as a reliable composite electrophysiological feature of epilepsy: the spike-ripple (Fig 1c). Although spikes and ripples are understood to represent separate neurophysiological events (Frauscher et al., 2017), in spiking channels, the majority of ripples are observed to co-occur with spikes (Frauscher et al., 2017; Kramer et al., 2019). Spike-ripples are commonly observed in invasive recordings in patients undergoing epilepsy surgery evaluation (Allen et al., 1992; Fisher et al., 1992; van Klink et al., 2016; Urrestarazu et al., 2006, 2007; Wang et al., 2013, 2017; Worrell et al., 2004, 2008), and available observations to-date from both non-invasive (Klink et al., 2016; Kramer et al., 2019) and invasive (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2013, 2017) recordings suggest that spike-ripples provide a more focal and specific biomarker for seizures than spikes or ripples alone. Thus, our focus on spike-ripples here addresses three fundamental issues: (i) By focusing on ripples that coincide with pathological interictal spikes (Staley and Dudek, 2006; Thomschewski et al., 2019) we disentangle physiologic from pathologic ripples (Thomschewski et al., 2019). (ii) By focusing on spikes that coincide with focal ripples, we improve the spatial specificity of spikes for the EZ (Engel Jr et al., 2009; van Klink et al., 2016; Kramer et al., 2019). (iii) Further, we have developed methods to rapidly and reliably quantify the combined spike-ripple event (Chu et al., 2017; Kramer et al., 2019). We will apply this method to existing intracranial human datasets (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018) previously analyzed for spikes and ripples as separate biomarkers of the EZ. Leveraging these large, annotated datasets collected from epilepsy patients with known surgical outcomes at five different hospitals we will determine whether spike-ripples provide an improved biomarker of the EZ compared to spikes or ripples alone (Aim 1). 

Automating the painstaking task of accurate ripple detection. Manual detection of ripples - the current gold standard - is difficult, subjective, and prohibitively time consuming. Manual review of 10 minutes of data from a single electrode channel can take an expert reviewer up to 15 h (Jacobs et al., 2009b). Thus, this existing gold-standard restricts analysis to a subset of the available data, lacks agreement between experts (Spring et al., 2017) and significantly limits rigor and reproducibility. To address these limitations, many automated and semi-automated ripple detection methods have been developed (Blanco et al., 2010; Gardner et al., 2007; Gliske et al., 2016; Jacobs et al., 2018; Zelmann et al., 2012). However, automated approaches have been limited by failure to reject artifacts and physiological events (Bénar et al., 2010; Cimbalnik et al., 2018; Jacobs and Schönberger, 2019; Matsumoto et al., 2013; Ren et al., 2019). We propose to address these restrictions in two innovative ways. First, we focus on spike-ripples, which (Chu et al., 2017) reduces detections due to artifacts (Kramer et al., 2019), and has improved specificity by selecting only those ripples that co-occur with pathological interictal epileptic spikes (van Klink et al., 2016; Thomschewski et al., 2019). Second, we will develop a fully-automated detection method by implementing a convolutional neural network (CNN) to replace visual inspection by a human observer. Successful development of this automated approach will create new opportunities for reliable, accurate, high-throughput detection of this epilepsy biomarker in large data sets, essential for clinical implementation. The tools developed will be made freely available to the broader scientific community for reuse and continued development (Aim 1).

Novel, fast, optical voltage imaging of single neurons to probe the mechanisms of spike-ripples in vivo in mouse models of epilepsy. The pathologic neuronal mechanisms that support spikes, ripples, and spike-ripples are unknown and a topic of enthusiastic research and debate (Alvarado-Rojas et al., 2013; Avoli and de Curtis, 2011; Barbarosie and Avoli, 1997; Chang et al., 2018; de Curtis and Avanzini, 2001; Dyhrfjeld-Johnsen et al., 2010; Guignard et al., 2012; Huberfeld et al., 2011; Jiruska et al., 2017a; Sabolek et al., 2012; Staba and Bragin, 2011; Traub et al., 2014). Ripples co-occurring with spikes are longer (Jacobs et al., 2008) and demonstrate phase-amplitude coupling with spikes (Weiss et al., 2016). In addition, ripples are longer after application of GABA-receptor agonists (Bragin et al., 2002a; Jones and Barth, 2002; Staba et al., 2002) and blocked by GABA-receptor antagonists (Stark et al., 2014). Similarly, spike propagation patterns are mediated by GABA-ergic inhibition (Sabolek et al., 2012), implicating pathologic inhibitory interneuron activity in both spike and ripple events (de Curtis et al., 2012). Alternatively, pyramidal cells pathologically coupled through gap-junctions have been proposed to deliver excitatory synaptic input (observed as ripples) to neighboring interneurons and pyramidal cells, whose subsequent activity initiates the interictal spike (Nimmrich et al., 2005; Pais et al., 2003; Roopun et al., 2010; Schmitz et al., 2001; Simon et al., 2014; Traub and Bibbig, 2000; Traub et al., 2005, 2011). One challenge that has prevented a deeper understanding of these competing candidate mechanisms was that conventional electrode based recording techniques could not definitively identify the cell type of individually recorded neurons, and available optical imaging techniques could not detect single neuron voltage dynamics with high temporal resolution from defined neuron types. A limited number of studies have used calcium imaging techniques to measure the recruitment of epileptic networks at a cellular scale in vivo (Baird-Daniel et al., 2017; Muldoon et al., 2015; Shuman et al., 2020). However, these approaches use intracellular calcium dynamics as a surrogate for neural activity, which is an indirect and poor measure of membrane voltage with temporal kinetics insufficient to resolve the rapid dynamics of ripples and individual neurons (Khoshkhoo et al., 2017; Wenzel et al., 2017). To address these knowledge gaps, we will utilize a novel optical voltage imaging technique (recently developed in Prof. Han’s group) (Piatkevich et al., 2019) to image in vivo single cell (excitatory neuron and inhibitory interneuron) voltage dynamics in mouse models of epilepsy. Our new voltage imaging techniques will provide high temporal (millisecond time-scale) and spatial (i.e., single-neuron) sensitivity from genetically defined neuron types, enabling, for the first time, direct visualization of the cellular populations and interactions among specific neuron types responsible for the spike and ripple activity in spike-ripple events (Aim 2). Moreover, previous efforts to observe neuronal dynamics using electrodes to record the local field potential (LFP) during electrical stimulation have been hampered by the large voltage artifacts produced on LFP electrodes by the stimulation. Using our new optical voltage imaging technique, we will be able to - for the first time - characterize fast neuronal voltage dynamics concurrent with electrical stimulation (Aim 3).

Combining human, animal, and computational models to characterize pathological spike-ripple dynamics. Clinical recordings from human patients provide the most accurate representation of human epilepsy. However, clinical recordings prohibit detailed characterization of single neuron dynamics, and interventions targeted at a single neuron type are not typically possible in humans. Animal models provide powerful techniques to study and manipulate single cells and probe the cellular mechanisms driving interictal epileptiform events. However, animal models of epilepsy do not reproduce all of the key features of human epilepsy (Löscher, 2011), and – even in multimodal observations – many biophysical features remain unobserved (e.g., transmembrane currents, connectivity through gap junctions). Computational models provide direct access to all biophysical features of a neuronal process (Wendling, 2008), but lack utility unless constrained by – and tested in – specific clinical and experimental observations. To address the weaknesses of these separate approaches, we propose a multidisciplinary translational analysis pipeline that combines clinical observations in humans, single neuron observations in animal models, and rapid exploration of candidate mechanisms in computational models. To do so we have assembled an interdisciplinary team that combines extensive clinical, experimental, and computational knowledge. We will use animal models to observe the single neuron and small network dynamics of spike-ripples (Aim 2), apply these observations to constrain a computational model of spike-ripples (Aim 2), and then investigate the computational model to identify candidate targets to disrupt spike-ripples in humans (Aim 3).  Focusing on a biomarker that combines established interictal epileptiform events (spikes and ripples) that are preserved across species (Buzsáki, 2015; Grone and Baraban, 2015), this novel approach will help clarify the neural classes – and neural circuits – that generate these activities, substantially advancing our understanding of the mechanisms driving these pathological brain events.

Probing the mechanisms of brain electrical stimulation in experiments and simulations. Cortical electrical stimulation in an open-loop or closed-loop, acute, subacute, or combination mode of operation have been shown to be an effective neuromodulatory approach to suppress seizures (Durand, 1986; Kinoshita et al., 2004, 2005; Kokkinos et al., 2019; Kossoff et al., 2004; Kwon et al., 2018; Lundstrom et al., 2016, 2019; Penfield and Jasper, 1954; Velasco et al., 2000; Yamamoto et al., 2002). The Responsive Neurostimulation System (NeuroPace Inc, RNS) was shown to reduce seizures in a prospective multicenter trial (Heck et al., 2014) and is now an FDA-approved option for patients with refractory epilepsy. This device targets the EZ with intermittent stimulation and provides an alternative neurosurgical option for patients whose EZ is near eloquent cortex or who elect less invasive options (Ma and Rao, 2018). Alternate neuromodulatory approaches using continuous stimulation are in development and have shown promise in early trials (Lundstrom et al., 2016, 2019). Such neuromodulatory approaches provide a highly focal and minimally invasive option compared to conventional resective surgical procedures. However, like resective surgery, the success of the devices require accurate targeting of the EZ, as well as appropriate physician-selected stimulation parameters identified from a nearly infinite set of possibilities (Lundstrom et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2008). The mechanisms of action of neuromodulation are not understood (Sisterson et al., 2020), contributing to lengthy trial-and-error periods and failure; only half of patients achieve a 50% reduction in seizures by 2 years post-operatively (Bergey et al., 2015; Geller et al., 2017; Jobst et al., 2017). Current standard of care requires years of in vivo adjustments of stimulation parameters through monthly office visits by the patient to trial varying current and frequency parameters for seizure control – often through a manual brute force approach (Sun et al., 2008). Patients remain at increased risk for severe injuries and sudden unexplained death during the interval to seizure control (Sisterson et al., 2020). By 6 years, improvement can be seen with 70% of patients reporting a 78% reduction in seizures; but because there is little understanding of the mechanisms that produce successful neuromodulation, there are currently no principled strategies to more rapidly achieve therapeutic stimulation parameters (Bergey et al., 2015; Geller et al., 2017; Jobst et al., 2017). Further, because seizures are rare and unpredictable, the efficacy of an intervention, and subsequent adjustments, cannot be measured in real-time. Efforts to use reductions in spike rate as a rapid interictal biomarker to select neurostimulation parameters have been promising (Kinoshita et al., 2004, 2005; Kossoff et al., 2004; Lundstrom et al., 2016; Velasco et al., 2000; Yamamoto et al., 2002), but did not result in  improved seizure control in a small, single center study using chronic stimulation delivered with variable parameters (Lundstrom et al., 2019). To address these challenges, we will use the knowledge obtained of the single neuron and population dynamics of spike-ripples from animal and computational models to identify candidate stimulation parameters that disrupt the cellular networks responsible for generating spike-ripples. We will rapidly explore the large range of stimulation parameters available in the current RNS device to identify candidate strategies in silico, test these strategies in animal models, and after identifying patterns that pass both models, test these optimized candidate parameters in humans with focal refractory epilepsy undergoing invasive intracranial recordings (Aim 3). In this way, we propose a multidisciplinary effort to advance the emerging field of neuromodulation by focusing on the interictal combined spike-ripple discharge. We propose that spike-ripples provide an improved target to identify the EZ, and an improved biomarker to rapidly measure stimulation efficacy. By understanding the biophysical mechanisms driving these events, we will develop a principled approach to select stimulation parameters that maximally impact the cells driving the EZ. 

The goal of our interdisciplinary team is to clarify the clinical significance and biophysical mechanisms generating interictal spike-ripple discharges, and develop new procedures to disrupt these pathological brain dynamics.

Our interdisciplinary team of researchers combines experience in clinical, experimental, statistical, and computational neuroscience. We briefly outline the unique contribution of each investigator. Chu (MGH) is a neurologist with expertise in epilepsy, cortical recordings, high frequency oscillations, and biomarker development (Aims 1,3) (Chu, 2018; Chu et al., 2012, 2014, 2015, 2017; Kramer et al., 2019; Ostrowski et al., 2019). Richardson (MGH) is a neurosurgeon with expertise in cortical and subcortical recordings, neurostimulation for epilepsy, and biomarkers of therapeutic neurostimulation for epilepsy (Aims 1,3) (Chrabaszcz et al., 2019; Kokkinos et al., 2019; Kondylis et al., 2014; Lipski et al., 2017; Richardson and Abel, 2019; Sisterson and Richardson, 2018; Sisterson et al., 2019, 2020; Wozny et al., 2017). Simon (MGH) is a neurologist with expertise in cortical stimulation (Aim 3) (Dineen et al., 2019; Karakis et al., 2015; Simon, 2019; Tsetsou et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2011). Kramer (BU) is a mathematical neuroscientist, with expertise in analysis and modeling of invasive EEG (Aims 2,3)(Ching et al., 2012; KOPELL et al., 2011; Kramer and Eden, 2016; Kramer et al., 2007, 2010, 2011, 2012; Martinet et al., 2017). Eden (BU) is a statistical neuroscientist, with expertise in the statistical analysis of neural data (Aim 1) (Eden and Brown, 2008; Eden et al., 2018; Meng et al., 2011, 2014). Han (BU) is a biomedical engineer, with expertise in neurotechnology development, voltage imaging in animal models, and optogenetics (Aims 2,3) (Gritton et al., 2019; Han et al., 2009; Piatkevich et al., 2019). Combined, our unique research team provides strong disciplinary skills with extensive experience communicating and collaborating across disciplines.

While strong associations exist between ripples and epilepsy (Frauscher et al., 2017), the clinical utility of ripples to identify the EZ for surgical targeting remains unclear (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). This lack of clinical utility may result from the failure of existing ripple detection methods to distinguish between physiological and pathological ripples. To address this difficulty, we focus on ripples that co-occur with epileptic spikes (i.e., spike-ripples), which have been observed to have increased specificity for the EZ compared to spikes or ripples alone. To determine whether spike-ripples provide a reliable biomarker to predict surgical outcome requires: (i) a large collection of patient data, and (ii) a reliable, reproducible detection method. To establish a large collection of data requires collaboration between multiple institutions. To analyze spike-ripples in long-duration recordings from multiple channels in a large number of subjects requires a fully-automated detection method. 

We have developed a semi-automated spike-ripple detector and demonstrated that spike-ripples can be reliably detected, are focal, and are specific for epilepsy. Manual detection of ripples is difficult, time consuming, and subjective. To address this, we developed a new, robust method to detect ripples that co-occur with spikes (Fig 1c). The method first identifies candidate time intervals of increased high-frequency activity, then computes seven features for each candidate event. These features require that the candidate event contain high-frequency fluctuations approximately sinusoidal in shape, with at least three cycles, that co-occur with a large amplitude discharge. The proposed method successfully detects spike-ripple events, with high positive predictive value, low false positive rate, and high intra-rater reliability (details in (Chu et al., 2017)). Using this method, we found that spike-ripples appear in the EEG of patients with focal childhood epilepsy, are more spatially restricted than spikes, and that resolution of spike-ripples correlates with epilepsy resolution (Kramer et al., 2019). While this semi-automated method is less time consuming (~2 minutes per 10 minute recording per channel) than most existing ripple detection procedures (~15 hours per 10 minute recording per channel (Jacobs et al., 2009b)), the method still requires expert classification by a human. One goal of this Aim is to fully automate this detection approach.

Spike-ripples occur in invasive EEG recordings of patients with different types of epilepsy. While ripples detected in invasive EEG recordings have been noted to co-occur with spikes (Allen et al., 1992; Fisher et al., 1992; Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018; Jirsch et al., 2006; van Klink et al., 2016; Urrestarazu et al., 2006, 2007; Wang et al., 2013, 2017; Weiss et al., 2018; Worrell et al., 2004, 2008), these events have not been the focus of clinical studies in epilepsy surgery patients (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2018). To illustrate the broader applicability of our approach, we applied our existing spike-ripple detector method to invasive EEG recordings from two patients (one pediatric, one adult) with different types of epilepsy (multifocal non-lesional and post-traumatic). We find spike-ripples in each patient in channels corresponding to the EZ (Fig 2). These preliminary results suggest that, consistent with the existing literature, spike-ripples are a general epileptic phenomenon that manifest in different types of human epilepsy in invasive EEG recordings.

Preliminary Result #3: A fully-automated convolutional neural network spike-ripple detector: prototype. We have begun development of a fully-automated spike-ripple detector. For our initial implementation, we reused the (n=1534) semi-automated spike-ripple detections, each manually classified by a human expert, analyzed in Preliminary Result #1. We used the spectrogram images (e.g., Fig 2) of the candidate spike-ripple detections as training data for a convolutional neural network (CNN) (Johansen et al., 2016; Ruffini et al., 2019), implemented in Python, using the PyTorch library ([CSL STYLE ERROR: reference with no printed form.]). Here we use the architecture ResNet (He et al., 2016), previously trained on ImageNet data ([CSL STYLE ERROR: reference with no printed form.]), as the islands of power in the spectrograms of spike-ripples resemble natural images. We used transfer learning to train the CNN (i.e. we retrained layers of this existing architecture on our spectrogram image training data). The CNN assigns each spectrogram a probability of containing a spike-ripple. By thresholding this probability, each spectrogram image is classified as either containing a spike-ripple (i.e., a “spectral island” in the image) or not. Using leave-one-out cross-validation, we find the fully-automated CNN detector performs with inter-rater agreement consistent with human experts (kappa = 0.729, observed proportional agreement = 0.868). We note that, while the semi-automated detector requires approximately 2 minutes per EEG channel, the fully-automated CNN detector requires less than 1 s per EEG channel.

Leveraging available prospectively collected, multi-institutional datasets to test spike-ripple performance to predict surgical outcome. Testing the performance of an interictal biomarker to improve surgical outcome requires the acquisition and annotation of large, multimodal datasets from patients with refractory focal epilepsy who undergo invasive monitoring, epilepsy surgery, and have known surgical outcomes, including intracranial voltage recordings datasets, electrode co-registration with surgical resection, and clinical outcomes. Enormous previous efforts to evaluate ripples as a promising candidate resulted in the collation of large, annotated datasets across multiple institutions (supported by NIH grants: K01-ES026839, K08-NS069783, R01-NS094399, UH2-NS095495, R01-NS063039, R01-NS092882, P20-NS080199, U01-NS082320, R01-NS082649, U54-NS092090, and U01-NS092595) (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). To determine whether spike-ripples are an improved biomarker for the EZ compared to ripples alone, we will collaborate with the PIs from these projects and leverage their existing datasets (see letters of collaboration from Drs. William Stacey (Gliske et al., 2018) and Julia Jacobs (Jacobs et al., 2018)). 

To optimize detection, reduce noise, and generate a database with sufficient false and positive detections, for each patient, we will select one bipolar channel within (or closest to) the EZ and two bipolar channels outside of the EZ and apply the semi-automated spike-ripple detector to 10 minutes of non-REM sleep (Frauscher et al., 2017). Two experts (Chu and Kramer) will manually classify each semi-automated detection. We will then apply the existing fully-automated convolutional neural network (CNN) detector to these invasive EEG data (as in Preliminary Result #3), and assess its performance using standard statistical measures (e.g., kappa statistic and observed proportional agreement) (Kramer et al., 2019). We will test the hypothesis that the fully-automated CNN detector accurately detects spike-ripples in the invasive EEG data. We choose 10 minutes of data from 36 patients to train and validate the fully-automated detector motivated by: (i) Preliminary Results #3 in which the same number of patients with scalp EEG was sufficient to train and validate the prototype fully-automated detector, and (ii) our previous work in (Kramer et al., 2019) in which the same number of patients was sufficient to validate the semi-automated detector.

As part of this project, we will further extend the fully-automated CNN detector to operate directly on brain voltage data, rather than classify candidate spike-ripple events selected by our existing detector in (Chu et al., 2017; Kramer et al., 2019); we call this the one-step fully-automated CNN spike-ripple detector. To do so, we will first compute the spectrogram in each 1 s interval (0.5 s overlap) of the invasive EEG data (n=36 patients) already classified. We will then assign each 1 s interval a label: “yes” if the interval contains a manually verified spike-ripple event, and “no” otherwise. These classified segments establish the data to test and train the one-step fully-automated CNN detector, which will now output a probability of each time segment containing a spike-ripple. To balance the training set it will consist of 50% “yes” labelled spectrograms and 50% “no” labelled spectrograms selected from the included patients. We will assess detector performance using a leave-one-out cross-validation. The test set will consist of all spectrograms from the left out patient. To assess performance, we will compute overall values for sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and AUC value for the ROC curve. 

We hypothesize that the one-step detector will outperform the fully-automated (two-step) CNN spike-ripple detector; the one-step detector will not rely on the semi-automated detector output, and will be trained on a wider variety of EEG features (i.e., times without candidate spike-ripple events). We expect both fully-automated detectors will perform with inter-rater reliability consistent with human experts, and our previous results using the semi-automated detector (Chu et al., 2017; Kramer et al., 2019).

False negatives in the semi-automated detector may obfuscate performance of the fully-automated CNN detector (i.e., the semi-automated detector may miss a true spike-ripple identified by the fully-automated detector). If the positive predictive value of the fully-automated detector is low, then we will manually examine data segments assigned high spike-ripple probability by the fully automated detector. The invasive EEG data from 36 subjects may be insufficient to train the CNN, depending on spike-ripple rate. If so, then we will analyze data from additional patients at MGH (we have over 200 datasets retrospectively available and anticipate 2-6 new invasive recordings per month). Finally, although we anticipate our novel CNN approach to analyze the spectrograms of spike-ripples will improve upon prior frequency-based methods that have failed (Klink et al., 2016), if the fully-automated CNN detector fails to improve performance, then we will include additional data features calculated directly from the time series data (e.g., cycle count, extent of amplitude deviation).

The clinical utility of existing automated ripple detectors to predict surgical outcome remains unclear (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). In this Project, we will test the hypothesis that spike-ripples better localize the epileptogenic zone (EZ) compared to spikes or ripples alone. To do so, we will apply the fully-automated spike-ripple detector (Aim 1, Project 1) to two existing invasive EEG datasets recorded from patients with refractory epilepsy from multiple institutions. Data: To enhance rigor and reproducibility we will analyze invasive EEG data collected at five other institutions: n=121 from (i) the Mayo Clinic and the University of Michigan, and n=52 from (ii) McGill University, UCLA, and University of Freiberg (Jacobs et al., 2018). Detectors: For ripple detection, we will utilize the results of existing detector application in (Gliske et al., 2018) and (Jacobs et al., 2018). For spike detection, we will apply an automated spike detector that performs as well as fellowship-trained clinical experts (Jing et al., 2020b, 2020a). This comparison enhances rigor and reproducibility by comparing detector results on the same invasive EEG data. Statistics: For each patient, we will compute the rate symmetry for spike-ripples, spikes, and ripples(Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). The rate symmetry is a normalized measure of the change in event rate within the clinically determined EZ. For each event type - spike-ripples, spikes, or ripples - we will compare the rate symmetries of patients with successful surgical outcomes (Engel I) versus patients with poor surgical outcomes (Engel II-IV), (Gliske et al., 2018; Jacobs et al., 2018). We will test for differences using generalized linear models to control for potential confounds (e.g., medication status) and to incorporate sex as a biological variable; this approach is often applied by our research team (e.g.,(Kramer and Eden, 2016)). Power analysis: Our previous work found a mean spike-ripple detection rate of 7.5/min (standard deviation 7.2/min) at the EZ in patients with active epilepsy, showed this rate decreased rapidly with distance from the EZ, and found a rate of 0.36/min (standard deviation 0.36/min) for patients in remission and healthy controls(Kramer et al., 2019). Given n=163 total subjects (68 with good surgical outcome, using power of 80%, and alpha of 5%), we expect to detect a decrease in spike-ripple rate symmetry as small as 0.58 (64%) between groups. This difference is smaller than the mean group difference in ripple rate symmetry reported in previous work(Jacobs et al., 2010, 2018).

We expect to find a significantly higher spike-ripple rate symmetry in patients with successful surgical outcomes compared to patients with poor surgical outcomes, consistent with the hypothesis that spike-ripples more accurately localize the EZ than spikes or ripples alone. We expect similar results across data sets.

The automated spike-ripple detector may fail in the new datasets. In that case, we will apply our existing semi-automated spike-ripple detector (Chu et al., 2017) to the additional data analyzed in Project 2, classify the detections manually (as in (Kramer et al., 2019)), and then use these new classifications to train the fully-automated spike-ripple detector. If the automated detector still fails, then we will use the existing semi-automated spike-ripple detector to undertake Project 2. Rate symmetry may not be the optimal statistic to measure biomarker performance; in this case, we will consider alternative measures (e.g. a rate threshold(Jacobs et al., 2018) or identification of the channel with peak rate(Gliske et al., 2018)). If we determine that spike-ripples do not improve upon spike or ripple performance to predict surgical outcome we will report this result and update Aims 2 & 3 to identify the mechanisms and optimal parameters to disrupt the interictal biomarker identified with best performance: spikes, ripples, or spike-ripples. 

Despite their fundamental importance in diagnosing and treating epilepsy, the neurophysiological mechanisms that support spikes (Alvarado-Rojas et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2002; Guignard et al., 2012; Sabolek et al., 2012) and ripples (Fink et al., 2015; Jiruska et al., 2017b; Traub et al., 2011, 2014) remain incompletely understood. Interictal spikes have been proposed to depend on both synaptic excitation and inhibition (Alvarado-Rojas et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2002; de Curtis and Avanzini, 2001; Köhling et al., 1998; Roopun et al., 2010; Traub et al., 2011). Ripples have been proposed to depend either on fast spiking interneurons (Bragin et al., 2002b, 2007; Brunel and Wang, 2003; Buzsáki et al., 1992; Csicsvari et al., 1999; Quyen et al., 2008; Schomburg et al., 2012; Taxidis et al., 2012; Ylinen et al., 1995) or gap-junctionally coupled pyramidal cells (Nimmrich et al., 2005; Pais et al., 2003; Roopun et al., 2010; Schmitz et al., 2001; Simon et al., 2014; Traub and Bibbig, 2000; Traub et al., 2005, 2011). Even less is known about the interactions between spikes and ripples (i.e., spike-ripples). At the cellular level, the contributions of excitatory and inhibitory cell populations to ripples that co-occur with spikes are unknown. Clinical neurophysiology and in vitro studies of resected human tissue suggest that ripples may contribute to spike initiation (Alvarado-Rojas et al., 2013). Conversely, early observations suggest that inhibitory activity during spikes may facilitate ripples (Bragin et al., 2002a; Jacobs et al., 2008; Jones and Barth, 2002; Staba et al., 2002; Stark et al., 2014; Weiss et al., 2016). Addressing these fundamental issues is not practical in in vivo clinical recordings from humans; micro- and macro-electrode extracellular recordings from human patients with epilepsy reveal neural spiking dynamics (Alarcón et al., 2012; Alvarado-Rojas et al., 2013; Truccolo et al., 2011), but not the neuron’s intracellular dynamics. While in vitro recordings from excised human tissue allow access to intracellular neuronal dynamics (Cohen et al., 2002; Köhling et al., 1998; Roopun et al., 2010), these neurons are necessarily disconnected from the epileptogenic network. To characterize the intracellular dynamics of neurons in a seizing brain network in vivo requires the application of new imaging tools to animal models of epilepsy, combined with the development of new computational models to probe candidate subcellular mechanisms (e.g., membrane currents). In what follows, we first summarize our previous work: (i) the development of a new voltage imaging technique with high temporal resolution of single neuron activity from defined neuron type, (ii) preliminary observations of example spike-ripples in two separate mouse models with epilepsy, and (iii) computational models of cortical dynamics. We then propose to build on this prior work to: (Project 1) observe the activity of excitatory neurons and different types of inhibitory neurons during spike-ripples in mice, and (Project 2) use these data to develop a computational model of spike-ripples.

Recently, the Han lab developed a novel, fully genetically encoded voltage sensor SomArchon that can measure both spiking and subthreshold membrane voltages from specific neuron types in awake behaving mice in many different brain regions, including the cortex (Fig 3) (Piatkevich et al., 2019). SomArchon when selectively expressed in excitatory or inhibitory cells allows us to record both action potentials and subthreshold voltage of these specific neuron types. In addition, SomArchon optical imaging can be performed in conjunction with traditional electrical recordings (i.e. with invasive intracranial electrodes), thus allowing us to analyze the relationship between the voltage dynamics of specific individual neurons with spike-ripple events detected via local field potential (LFP) recordings. 

The Han lab has observed two separate mouse models that produce spontaneous seizures (cholinergic agonist carbachol infusion in Fig 4a,b; and direct cortical trauma from equipment implantation, Fig 4c,d). Applying the semi-automated spike-ripple detector (Chu et al., 2017) to these data, we find spike-ripples in the same LFP recording channels where the seizures are observed (Fig 4b,c,d). These examples support the conclusion that cortical regions in epileptic mice that generate seizures also generate spike-ripples. 

Over the past 10 years, PI Kramer has developed a cortical column model to produce different physiological brain rhythms (e.g., gamma, beta-1, and beta-2 (Kopell et al., 2011; Kramer et al., 2008)). This model balances biophysical realism with computational and intellectual tractability. While the model implements populations of Hodgkin-Huxley-type neurons (an approach commonly used in the neuroscience community (Ermentrout and Terman, 2010)), the number of compartments (less than 3) and cells (between 10 and 40) is limited. This model was initially developed to match detailed in vitro experimental results (Kramer et al., 2008) and capture the basic mechanisms of rhythms that appear across species (Buzsaki; Wang, 2010). We note that the neural populations developed in this model establish basic model objects in a new toolbox for neural modeling and simulation (Sherfey et al., 2018). To illustrate this modeling approach, we simulate the cortical column model to produce four different cortical rhythms. We briefly define the cortical model here; more detailed descriptions may be found in (Kopell et al., 2011; Kramer et al., 2008). Each column consists of five cell types (Fig 5a). The superficial layer consists of: 40 single-compartment regular spiking (RS) pyramidal cells, 10 single-compartment fast-spiking basket (b) cells, and 10 single-compartment low-threshold spiking (LTS) interneurons. The deep layer consists of 10 four-compartment intrinsically bursting (IB) cells, and 10 single-compartment fast-spiking “neurogliaform”-type (NG) interneurons. Chemical synapses link the cell populations: Each RS cell connects to all basket cells, all LTS cells, and all IB cells. Each IB cell connects to all basket, LTS, and NG cells. Each basket cell connects to itself and all RS cells. Each LTS cell connects to itself, and all RS and IB cells. Each NG cell connects to all IB cells. Axoaxonal gap junctions connect all IB cells (Kopell et al., 2011; Kramer et al., 2008). 

We simulate a sparse pyramidal-interneuron-network gamma (PING) rhythm in the superficial layer (Fig 5b) (Whittington et al., 2000). In sparse PING, individual RS cells spike infrequently during each gamma cycle, whereas the basket cells fire at close to the population frequency. Therefore, although the firing rate of each RS neuron is low, the population activity produces a gamma rhythm (30-80 Hz). Simultaneously, the deep layer IB cells burst to produce a beta-2 rhythm (20-30 Hz, Fig 5c), paced by a muscarinic receptor-suppressed (M-current) in the axons (Roopun et al., 2006). With different parameter settings that represent a decrease in excitatory drive to the column, we simulate a beta-1 rhythm across all cortical layers (Kramer et al., 2008). One period of the beta-1 oscillation consists of spiking in the deep layer, followed one gamma cycle (~25 ms) later by spiking in the superficial layer, and followed one beta-2 cycle (~40 ms) later by spiking again in the deep layer (Fig 5d). Finally, in a final parameter configuration representing the low cholinergic and dopaminergic tone in the mammalian brain during non-REM sleep, we simulate delta rhythms (~2 Hz) in the deep layer (Fig 5e). The rhythm is paced by NMDA / GABAB synaptic interactions between the IB and NG cells, consistent with in vitro experimental results (Carracedo et al., 2013). One goal of this proposal is to extend the existing cortical-column model to produce spike-ripples. We note that more mathematical models of seizures provide important theoretical insights(Jirsa et al., 2014), but limited guidance to the experimental and stimulation studies of interest here.

The cellular mechanisms that generate spike-ripples are unknown. In this project, we will examine the single-cell voltage dynamics of excitatory versus inhibitory neurons during spike-ripples discharges in murine models of epilepsy. We will simultaneously measure cortical LFP, and individual neurons’ action potentials (AP) and subthreshold membrane voltage (Vm) using the voltage imaging technique described above (Fig 3) from four types of motor cortex neurons: CamKII+ excitatory neurons, GAD2+ GABAergic inhibitory neurons, Pavalbumin+ interneuron subtype (PV cells), and Somatostatin positive interneuron subtypes (SOM cells). 

To perform voltage imaging of individual excitatory neurons, we will inject mice with AAV-CamKII-SomArchon, since the CamKII promoter when used in an AAV gene expression viral vector is known to be selective toward excitatory neurons in mice(Dittgen et al., 2004; Han et al., 2009). To perform voltage imaging of individual GAD2+, PV+ or SOM+ GABAergic interneurons, we will inject cre-dependent AAV-Flex-SomArchon virus in GAD-Cre (JAX, Gad2tm2(cre)Zjh/J), PV-cre  (JAX,  129P2-Pvalbtm1(cre)Arbr/J),  or SOM-cre (JAX, Ssttm2.1(cre)Zjh/J) mice, respectively. Mice will be implanted with a custom imaging chamber (about 3mm in diameter) with a glass bottom over the motor cortex (centered at AP: +1.5mm, ML: ±1.5 mm, relative to bregma) to allow for optical access for voltage imaging as detailed in (Piatkevich et al., 2019) and Fig 3. LFP electrodes will be coupled to the imaging chamber for cortical LFP recordings. 

A number of animal epilepsy models have been developed, and there are limitations for each specific model (Avramescu and Timofeev, 2008; Chauvette et al., 2016; Grone and Baraban, 2015; Löscher, 2011; Shuman et al., 2020). Since our goal is to identify how excitatory and inhibitory neurons selectively contribute to the generation of spike-ripples, our study design is less sensitive to the specific limitations of a given epilepsy model. We will start with two well established acquired epilepsy mouse models motivated by our pilot results: a pilocarpine-treated model and a direct cortical trauma brain injury model. The pilocarpine-treated epileptic model will be generated by systemic pilocarpine-hydrochloride (Sigma CAS 54-71-7) injections at 275 mg/kg (i.p.), 30 mins after i.p. injection of scopolamine methyl bromide (Sigma, CAS 155-41-9) to reduce the peripheral effects of pilocarpine (Shuman et al., 2020).  Animals that do not develop seizures within 45 mins will receive a second injection at 50-100 mg/kg. The direct cortical trauma model is generated using cortical undercut techniques by cutting the cortical tissue and white matter beneath the somatosensory cortex (AP: -1.5 mm, ML, 1.0 mm, Depth: up to 1.2 mm from cortical surface) adjacent to the recording site (Avramescu and Timofeev, 2008; Chauvette et al., 2016). To confirm epilepsy, mice will be video monitored in their home cage and seizures scored manually. Animals that do not develop epilepsy will be excluded. 

An equal number of male and female adult mice will be used, and sex is not a factor of the study. If we notice any difference between male and female mice during our experiments, we will include additional mice to further investigate any potential sex difference. Power analysis: Two-photon calcium imaging in a pilocarpine-treated epileptic mouse model observed an approximate spike rate 3.5/min (2619 spikes from 10 mice) (Muldoon et al., 2015). Because ripples occur on approximately 10-20% of spikes (Chu et al., 2017; van Klink et al., 2016), we expect in the pilocarpine model a spike-ripple rate above 0.35/min.  Multiunit activity just before a spike in the pilocarpine-treated epileptic mouse has been reported to have mean firing rate 17 Hz ±10 Hz (Muldoon et al., 2015). To detect a 25% change in firing rate (power 80%, alpha 5%) between excitatory neurons and an inhibitory neuron subtype requires a sample size of 43 spike-ripple events or 123 min of data. We expect to image 30-50 min per mouse across 3-5 recording sessions, and therefore require 3-5 mice per genotype. We consider two epilepsy models; as our experimental procedure success rate is about 30%, and 50% of the Cre-transgenic mice will have the correct genotype, we expect to use a total of 30 wild type mice and 60 mice for each transgenic mouse line. Additional details are in Vertebrate Animals.

We will detect spike-ripples in the LFP using the fully-automated detector (Aim 1). For each spike-ripple detection we will compute the following LFP features: the frequency and duration of the ripple, the amplitude and duration of the spike, and the timing of the ripple relative to the spike. We will also analyze the single neuron activity during each spike-ripple, specifically: when excitatory pyramidal cells and the different interneuron types fire relative to the ripple and spike events, the firing properties of active neurons (e.g., bursting versus tonic), and the subthreshold dynamics (e.g., paroxysmal slow depolarization events). We will compare the LFP features of spike-ripples observed in the mouse to spike-ripple features observed in humans.

Consistent with our preliminary results, we expect to observe spike-ripples in each mouse model of epilepsy, and spike-ripple features to be consistent between mouse models and human recordings. We expect to determine the cell types active during different stages of the spike-ripple.

The voltage imaging method is well established and we do not expect any technical difficulties. The mouse epilepsy models may fail to produce spike-ripples. If so, we will explore other mouse models of epilepsy (e.g., 6-Hz electrically induced psychomotor seizure mouse model that can be easily accomplished through our experimental preparation with implanted LFP electrodes and amygdala electrical stimulation kindling models). If the automated spike-ripple detector fails to detect spike-ripples, we will utilize the semi-automated detector, which has successfully identified spike-ripples in our pilot data. 

The subcellular mechanisms that support spike-ripples are unknown. We propose to investigate these mechanisms in a computational model (Fig 5). To do so, we will use the experimental data collected in Aim 2, Project 1 to constrain the model parameters. We will begin by fixing all parameters at physiological values, except for: (i) gap junctions between pyramidal cells (Fig 5, RS and IB), and (ii) GABAergic synapses from fast-spiking cells (Fig 5, basket and NG). For these parameters, we will explore a wide range from 0 (i.e., absence of gap junctions or GABAergic synapses) to maximal physiological values. For each parameter setting, we will simulate (a) a baseline condition of weak excitatory drive to all neurons, (b) increased excitatory drive separately to each neural population, and (c) increased excitatory drive to all neurons. We choose to explore these parameters motivated by their proposed roles in the generation of ripples (Aivar et al., 2014; Fink et al., 2015; Foffani et al., 2007; Guignard et al., 2012; Jiruska et al., 2017b; Karlócai et al., 2014; Traub et al., 2011; Wendling et al., 2012) and spikes. For each parameter setting, we will also consider low and high levels of synaptic noise (Fink et al., 2015; Stacey et al., 2009). To calculate simulated dynamics across wide parameter ranges, we will utilize software developed by BU researchers and students (DynaSim, github.com/DynaSim/) that takes advantage of BU’s Shared Computing Cluster. We will record the voltage and current dynamics of each neuron, and calculate the LFP as the summed transmembrane ionic currents to the pyramidal cells (Traub et al., 2005). We will compute for the in silico data the same LFP and single neuron features calculated for the in vivo data (described in Aim 2, Project 1). We will then identify the model parameter configurations whose dynamics best match the features observed in the in vivo data. Through this approach, we utilize computational resources and biological knowledge to identify candidate parameter configurations with spike-ripple features consistent with the in vivo data.

We expect to find model parameters that produce dynamics consistent with the in vivo data. We expect to identify subcellular mechanisms of spike-ripples consistent with mechanisms proposed to support spikes and ripples separately.

We initially focus on a subset of parameters reflecting the two leading theories of mechanisms of ripple generation. The model, however, provides opportunities to investigate additional competing theories. (i) Observations from human subiculum suggest depolarizing GABAergic events may contribute to the interictal spike (Cohen et al., 2002; Köhling et al., 1998), while observations from human cortex suggest interictal spikes are accompanied by normal, hyperpolarizing GABAergic events (Köhling et al., 1998; Roopun et al., 2010). To explore these competing mechanisms on the spike-ripple, we may extend the simulated parameter sweeps to include a range of GABAA synapse reversal potential values. (ii) Recurrent excitatory synaptic transmission between pyramidal cells may (Dzhala and Staley, 2004; Guignard et al., 2012) or may not (Roopun et al., 2010; Traub et al., 2010) be necessary for ripples; To explore these competing mechanisms on the spike-ripple, we may extend the simulated parameter sweeps to include a range of AMPA synapse strength values. We expect to simulate spike-ripples in the cortical column model; the model derives from a simplification of (Traub et al., 2005), which has been shown to produce spike-ripples in silico (Roopun et al., 2010; Traub et al., 2005). If we fail to simulate spike-ripples in this model, then we will consider inclusion of deep brain structures into the model (e.g., thalamus (Hu et al., 2018)) and alternative models shown to produce both spikes and ripples (Guignard et al., 2012; Jacob et al., 2019). The spatial distribution of pyramidal cells may impact spike-ripple generation (Guignard et al., 2012); to explore this, we may extend the model to a 2-dimensional grid of interacting cortical columns, with long-range excitatory synapses between columns.

Open-loop electrical stimulation has been shown to reduce interictal spikes and seizures (Child et al., 2014; Elisevich et al., 2006; Kinoshita et al., 2004, 2005; Kossoff et al., 2004; Lundstrom et al., 2016, 2017, 2019; Valentin et al., 2016; Velasco et al., 2009; Yamamoto et al., 2002, 2006). However, the mechanisms of action and optimal stimulation parameters are unknown. In this Aim, we propose to explore the impact of stimulation on spike-ripples in silico and in mouse models of epilepsy, and test optimized candidate parameters in humans. Our interdisciplinary team is uniquely positioned to undertake the proposed work. Drs. Chu, Richardson, and Simon have extensive clinical and research experience in stimulation to treat epilepsy and for functional cortical mapping in vivo in human patients (Chu et al., 2012, 2014, 2015; Kokkinos et al., 2019; Kramer et al., 2019; Ostrowski et al., 2019; Sisterson et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2011). Please see Human Subjects and Clinical Trials materials. Prof. Han is an expert in simultaneous electrical stimulation and optical imaging of neurons in mice. Please see Vertebrate Animals materials. Profs. Kramer and Eden have expertise in the analysis and modeling of neurostimulation (Basu et al., 2018; Ching et al., 2012; Paulk et al., 2019; Widge et al., 2017; Yousefi et al., 2019). We will use our combined expertise to undertake the following projects:

Although potential mechanistic effects of electrical neurostimulation have been proposed (Denney and Brookhart, 1962; Jefferys, 1981; Komarov et al., 2019; Purpura and McMurtry, 1965; Tranchina and Nicholson, 1986), how electrical stimulation impacts the cell populations that generate spike-ripples is unclear. To begin to address this, we will implement the effects of clinically relevant electrical stimulation in the computational model. To mimic the effect of an external field generated by electrical stimulation, we will apply a new effective current to cell types in each layer (Komarov et al., 2019). We will assume that this new current is identical in all cells of the same type and layer in the cortical column. We will then simulate the model with parameters constrained by the experimental data (see Aim 2, Project 2) to generate spike-ripples. To explore how stimulation impacts the simulated spike-ripple activity, we will simulate the model under a wide range of stimulus patterns to rapidly explore the parameter space which is available, but inadequately explored, within the current RNS system (e.g., biphasic pulses ranging in frequency: 100-200 Hz; burst duration 10-5000 ms; current 0.5 to 12.0mA) (Jobst et al., 2017). We will apply each stimulation parameter setting to each cell type, and calculate the impact on each model neuron (e.g., change in firing rate) and the simulated LFP during spike-ripples. We will identify the set of stimulation parameter settings most disruptive to the mechanisms generating the spike-ripple.

We expect to rapidly identify parameter settings within the range of parameters available in the current RNS system that are disruptive to spike-ripples in the computational model. If ripples depend on gap-junctionally coupled pyramidal cells, then we expect stimulations that inactivate or desynchronize pyramidal cells will be most disruptive to spike-ripples. If ripples depend on fast spiking interneurons, then we expect stimulations that inactivate or desynchronize interneurons will be most disruptive to spike-ripples.

If conventional stimulation parameters fail to disrupt spike-ripples in the model, then we will explore parameters beyond conventional settings, but within safe physiological ranges (e.g. < 40 µC/cm2 (Cogan et al., 2016; Hern et al., 1962; Ranck, 1975; Simon, 2019)), such as ultrafast (200-1000 Hz) and slow (<1 Hz) stimulation.

In this project, we evaluate the impact of open-loop electrical stimulation on spike-ripple events, action potentials, and subthreshold voltage dynamics of pyramidal cells and interneurons imaged optically in two mouse models. We will compare three stimulation patterns: (i) the recommended RNS “initial” stimulation pattern (1.0 mA, 200 Hz, 160 µs, 100 ms burst duration)(2019), (ii) a “final” stimulation pattern with current titrated to reflect the most common final charge density after 6.1 ± 2.6 yrs (6.1 µC/cm2;  <12 mA, 200 Hz, 160 µs, 100 ms burst duration)(Jobst et al., 2017), and (iii) the optimal candidate stimulation pattern identified in silico (Aim 3, Project 1). Mice implanted with an imaging chamber and intracranial electrodes described in Aim 2, Project 1, will be further examined here. Although initially designed for closed-loop ictal detection and stimulation, in practice the vast majority of RNS stimuli are triggered by false detections approximating an open-loop interictal system (Jobst et al., 2017; Sun and Morrell, 2014). Comparable to reported RNS interictal stimulation rates, we will deliver open-loop neurostimulation once per 1.8 min (Jobst et al., 2017). We will perform voltage imaging of individual pyramidal cells, GAD+ interneurons, PV+ interneurons, or SOM+ interneurons, while delivering electrical stimulation of specific patterns via the implanted intracranial electrodes. We will test the hypothesis that the optimal stimulation parameters identified in silico will decrease spike-ripple rate more than initial and final RNS parameters. In addition, we will use voltage imaging to examine single neuron activity before, during and following electrical stimulation. We note that, by combining voltage imaging and electrical stimulation, we can observe single neuron activity during electrical stimulation without stimulation artifacts. 

We expect similar stimulation patterns will have similar impact on pyramidal cells and interneurons in the mouse model and the computational model. We expect the stimulation patterns identified as most disruptive in the computational model (Aim 3, Project 1) will be more disruptive to spike-ripples in vivo in both mouse models, compared to standard stimulation settings. 

The computational model may fail to predict the impact of electrical stimulation in vivo. If so, we will extend the parameter search in Aim 2, Project 2 to include electrical stimulation, and include an additional quantitative feature to compare between the in silico and in vivo data: the response of pyramidal cells and interneurons to electrical stimulation. Doing so adds additional data and experiments to constrain the computational model. We will then reinvestigate stimulation parameters in the further constrained computational model to identify new optimal stimulation patterns, and apply these in the mouse models. If the optimized patterns from the computational model still fail in the mouse models, then we will systematically explore a range of stimulation parameters in the mouse models, and identify the stimulation patterns that most reduce the spike-ripple rate in the mouse models. If we still fail to find stimulation patterns that reduce spike-ripple rate, then we will determine whether stimulation impacts additional spike-ripple features (e.g., duration, frequency, amplitude).

Open-loop electrical stimulation has been found to reduce spike activity and seizures, but determining the optimal parameters to achieve these effects requires a brute force trial-and-error approach that relies on subjective physician discretion (Lundstrom et al., 2019; PINEAU et al., 2009). To test the performance of optimized candidate stimulation parameters identified through a principled pipeline using computational and animal models, we will compare the performance of stimulation parameters identified in Aim 3, Project 2 to the recommended “initial” and “final” parameters for RNS neuromodulation used in clinical practice (outlined in Aim 3, Project 2) in 30 human subjects with refractory focal epilepsy undergoing chronic invasive monitoring (see Human Subjects and Clinical Trials materials). For this analysis, we will target channels with maximal spike-ripple rate, requiring a minimum spike-ripples rate of 0.5/min (Kramer et al., 2019). To establish a baseline spike-ripple rate, we will analyze 1 hour of NREM recording using the automated spike-ripple detector developed in Aim 1, Project 1. Using the FDA approved Nicolet Cortical Stimulator (Natus Manufacturer), we will deliver each of our 3 parameter sets (optimized, “initial” RNS, and “final” RNS settings) in an open-loop fashion for 15 minutes, separated by 15 minutes. We will compare spike-ripple rate during stimulation to the baseline rate. All epochs with stimulation artifact ±50 ms will be ignored (Lundstrom et al., 2016, 2019). Power Analysis: In our previous work (Kramer et al., 2019) we found a mean spike-ripple detection rate of 7.5/min ± 7.2/min for patients with active epilepsy, and 0.36/min ± 0.36/min for patients without seizures. Assuming similar effect sizes, to detect a 50% reduction in spike-ripple rate, with a power of 80% and an alpha of 5%, requires 29 subjects.

We expect to find that the optimized parameter patterns will reduce spike-ripple rate compared to initial and final RNS stimulation parameters in current clinical use.

If longer stimulation periods (or breaks between stimulation trials) are required to detect an effect, we will adjust as needed. If we determine that stimulation patterns cannot be optimized from animal and computational models, we will test a larger subset of candidate parameters in humans. In the event that intermittent closed loop stimulation is not sufficient to prevent spike-ripples, we will explore open-loop continuous cortical stimulation (Fisher et al., 2010; Lundstrom et al., 2019; Salanova et al., 2015) and begin development of closed-loop stimulation targeting spike-ripples.

Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) is the most common focal childhood epilepsy syndrome, characterized by a transient period of seizures and abundant epileptiform spikes arising from the sensorimotor cortex during non-REM (NREM) sleep. Recent findings indicate that BECTS is a developmental disorder with a wider range of severity than previously appreciated. In addition to seizures, children have deficits in attention and motor coordination. The motor and cognitive symptoms in BECTS exist on a spectrum of severity, clinically and genetically overlapping with severe epileptic encephalopathies, which are characterized by permanent and progressive declines in cerebral function coincident with sleep activated spikes. There are currently no proven treatment strategies to address the neuropsychological deficits in BECTS or other epileptic encephalopathies. Several lines of evidence, including our preliminary findings, suggest a dysfunction in thalamocortical circuitry drives the motor and cognitive abnormalities in BECTS. First, thalamocortical structural circuits are abnormal in BECTS. Second, children with BECTS have reduced sleep spindles, oscillations that are critical for memory consolidation during NREM sleep and generated and propagated by thalamocortical circuitry. Third, thalamocortical sensory gating is impaired in children with centrotemporal spikes, like those observed in BECTS. Effective dampening or “gating” of irrelevant sensory information prior to reaching the cortex, mediates performance on attentional tasks. Despite this evidence, the relationship between thalamocortical electrophysiology, connectivity, and cognitive symptoms in BECTS has not been investigated. The long term goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that focal thalamocortical circuit dysfunction mediates the motor and cognitive symptoms in BECTS. Our interdisciplinary team - consisting of a pediatric epileptologist, a neuropsychologist, and a computational neuroscientist – will use validated experimental paradigms and computational tools to collect and analyze multimodal data to link thalamocortical circuit abnormalities to cognitive deficits in children with BECTS. First, we will determine whether children with BECTS show abnormal sleep spindle activity that relates to impaired sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Second, we will determine whether impaired sensory gating and thalamocortical connectivity relate to impaired attention in BECTS. Third, we will test the impact of medication and closed loop auditory stimulation on thalamocortical spindles, gating, and cognitive function in BECTS. Completion of the proposal goals will represent significant progress towards understanding the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying cognitive dysfunction in BECTS, and the identification of new targets and approaches for treating cognitive deficits in BECTS and related epileptic encephalopathies. 


BECTS is a common developmental disorder and there are no treatments for the characteristic motor and cognitive deficits. Benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS) is the most common focal childhood epilepsy syndrome, characterized by nocturnal seizures and abundant epileptiform spikes arising from the sensorimotor cortex during non-REM (NREM) sleep.(Astradsson et al., 1998; Berg and Rychlik, 2015; Callenbach et al., 2010; Camfield and Camfield, 2014; Larsson and Eeg-Olofsson, 2006) Although long-term epilepsy outcome is favorable, recent findings indicate that BECTS has a wider range of severity than previously appreciated. In addition to epilepsy, motor and cognitive comorbidities are increasingly recognized. Specific difficulties with attention and motor coordination are well documented in children with BECTS,(Scheffer et al., 2017) and a recent meta-analysis revealed deficits across all cognitive domains.(Wickens et al., 2017) These neuropsychological deficits occur during critical school years and over 40% of children report at least one adverse psychosocial problem after thirty years of follow-up.(Camfield and Camfield, 2014) 
In line with the EEG findings of abundant sleep activated interictal spikes and cognitive deficits, BECTS exists on a spectrum of severity, and overlaps clinically and electrophysiologically with severe epileptic encephalopathies (e.g., continuous spike and wave of sleep with encephalopathy [CSWS] and Landau Kleffner syndrome [LKS]), which are characterized by interictal spikes in more than 85% of NREM sleep and permanent and progressive declines in cerebral function.(Gao et al., 2017; Kessi et al., 2018; Lemke et al., 2013; Strehlow et al., 2019)  Supporting this phenotypic overlap, genetic studies reveal the same pathologic mutation can lead to CSWS or BECTS, and 6.6% of BECTS cases meet diagnostic criteria for LKS or CSWS.(Tovia et al., 2011) Thus in many cases BECTS is not benign. Efforts to link interictal spike activity to cognitive function have been unrevealing(Bjørnæs et al., 2013; Larsson et al., 2012; Sánchez Fernández et al., 2012a, 2013; Vega et al., 2018) and presently there are no known pathophysiological mechanisms to explain the motor and cognitive deficits in BECTS or proven treatment strategies to address them.(Glauser et al., 2006; Tan et al., 2014) Identifying a mechanism and effectively treating these characteristic neuropsychological deficits during school years would have a profoundly positive effect on functional outcome in children with BECTS.

It is well-established that interictal spikes and sleep spindles can be generated by the same thalamocortical circuit (Fig. 1).(Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Manoach and Stickgold, 2019; Steriade, 2005) The stereotyped electrophysiology in BECTS is characterized by spikes that are activated during stages 2 and 3 NREM sleep and localize to the bilateral sensorimotor cortices.(Boor et al., 2007; Pataraia et al., 2008) Sleep spindles,(Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005; Guaraldi et al., 2019; McCormick and Bal, 1997; McCormick et al., 2015) brief bursts of oscillatory sigma band (10-16 Hz) activity are present only in NREM sleep and also localize with maximal activity to the bilateral sensorimotor cortices,(Pinto et al., 2014) spatially and temporally overlapping with the spikes observed in BECTS. The thalamocortical circuit underlying sleep spindles has been well characterized. Spindles are generated in the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) which is comprised entirely of GABAergic neurons.(Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005; Guillery and Harting, 2003; Houser et al., 1980; McCormick and Bal, 1997) These neurons project primarily to glutamatergic thalamocortical neurons, which entrain cortical areas to their sigma-frequency rhythms.(Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009) The resulting rhythms - sleep spindles - are amplified, and propagated through corticocortical and thalamocortical circuits. Corticothalamic neurons send glutamatergic inputs back to the thalamus, producing a feedback loop regulated primarily by GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission.(Jacobsen et al., 2001)
Several observations suggest that spikes are generated by pathologically hijacking the same thalamocortical circuit that generates spindles.(Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009) In vitro, spikes and spindles can both be recorded from single thalamic cells and thalamic slice preparations after different pharmacologic treatments.(Huguenard and Prince, 1994; Kim et al., 1997; von Krosigk et al., 1993) In humans, thalamic and cortical activity measured with depth electrodes are phase locked during both spindles and spikes.(Andersen et al., 1967; Williams, 1953) Thalamocortical circuitry has long been implicat-ed in the pathophysiology of generalized seizures in absence epilepsy.(Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Clemente-Perez et al., 2017; Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Maheshwari and Noebels, 2014; Williams, 1953) We also know that discrete thalamocortical assemblages generate focal spindles(Andersen et al., 1967) and emerging evidence demonstrates that these focal circuits can also be used to promote focal abnormalities, as in BECTS.(Clemente-Perez et al., 2017; Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016) In particular, we now know that sensorimotor thalamocortical circuits promote spatially distinct spindle populations(Fogerson and Huguenard, 2016; Nishida and Walker, 2007) and these sensorimotor spindles have been mechanistically tied to focal seizures in mouse models.(Clemente-Perez et al., 2017) In addition, sensorimotor spindles mature over childhood,(Hahn et al., 2019; Purcell et al., 2017) coincident with the age period that BECTS presents. Focal disruption of thalamocortical circuitry in BECTS, as suggested by focal sleep-activated spikes and other evidence reviewed below, may result in focal disruptions in sleep spindles (Aim 1).
     
Efforts to link spike activity to neuropsychological deficits in BECTS and related epileptic encephalopathies have not revealed any relationship.(Bjørnæs et al., 2013; Larsson et al., 2012; Sánchez Fernández et al., 2012a, 2013; Vega et al., 2018) In contrast, sleep spindles are well-established in neuroscience literature as critical for memory consolidation during NREM sleep and offer a more direct, established pathophysiological biomarker than spikes for the motor and cognitive deficits observed.(Fogel and Smith, 2006; Nishida and Walker, 2007; Peters et al., 2008; Rasch et al., 2009; Rosanova and Ulrich, 2005; Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003; Tamaki et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2002) Evidence from animal studies demonstrates that spindles are a key mechanism coordinating the synaptic plasticity required for memory consolidation during sleep.(Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009; Rosanova and Ulrich, 2005; Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003) Human studies have linked spindles to the sleep-dependent consolidation of both procedural(Fogel and Smith, 2006; Nishida and Walker, 2007; Peters et al., 2008; Rasch et al., 2009; Tamaki et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2002) and declarative(Clemens et al., 2005, 2006; Schabus et al., 2008) memory. General cognitive abilities(Farmer et al., 2018) and sleep dependent memory consolidation are also linked to spindle density (number per minute) in children.(Hahn et al., 2019) We have demonstrated that a deficit in sleep spindles correlates with impaired sleep-dependent memory consolidation (Fig 2), IQ, and executive dysfunction in schizophrenia,(Baran et al., 2018; Manoach and Stickgold, 2019; Manoach et al., 2004, 2016; Wamsley et al., 2012) a disorder associated with TRN pathology,(Court et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2001; Steullet et al., 2018) and we have the tools and expertise to evaluate these relationships in BECTS. In particular, the finger tapping motor sequence task (MST) is a well-validated probe of sleep-dependent motor learning, engaging the specific sensorimotor circuit  affected in BECTS.(Walker et al., 2002) We will determine whether children with BECTS have abnormal spindle activity in the sensorimotor cortex that relates to impaired sleep-dependent motor memory consolidation (Aim 1). 

During sleep, strong TRN-mediated inhibition of thalamocortical neurons results in the burst firing that gives rise to spindles; during wakefulness, inhibition by these same neurons gates the relay of sensory and motor information to cortex.(Crick, 1984; Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005) Through this “sensory gating” the TRN attenuates the transmission of redundant and irrelevant stimuli to the cortex, protecting higher cognitive function from interference.(Crick, 1984; McAlonan et al., 2008; McCormick and Bal, 1994; Pinault, 2004; Yu et al., 2009a; Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2007) At the cellular level, TRN neurons show a strong response to an initial auditory stimulus and an attenuated response to a repeated stimulus.(Yu et al., 2009b) The selective firing of TRN neurons correlates with better selective attention(Ahrens et al., 2015) and sensory detection.(Yu et al., 2009a) Failure of TRN mediated inhibition results in the loss of the normal gating response, and loss of TRN neurons impairs behavior that depends on sensory selection.(Halassa et al., 2014) Deficient sensory gating is well characterized in patients with psychosis(Adler et al., 1982; Brockhaus-Dumke et al., 2008; Clementz et al., 1998; Freedman et al., 1997; Myles-Worsley et al., 2004; Olincy et al., 2010; Patterson et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2010) and correlates with cognitive dysfunction.(Smith et al., 2010; Thoma et al., 2003) Deficient sensory gating also correlates with symptoms of inattention in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder(Holstein et al., 2013; Micoulaud-Franchi et al., 2015) and stronger sensory gating correlates with improved impulse control in gifted children.(Liu et al., 2011) 
In BECTS, abnormal giant somatosensory potentials are a characteristic clinical feature,(Kubota et al., 2000; Plasmati et al., 1992) suggesting reduced thalamic inhibition of evoked cortical responses. Further supporting this hypothesis, impaired gating responses localize to the sensorimotor cortex(Knott et al., 2009) and one study found that children with centrotemporal spikes on EEG, the same neurophysiologic abnormality observed in BECTS, have reduced sensory gating.(Fiedler et al., 2006) In healthy adults, we have found that reduced sensory gating correlates with lower spindle density, consistent with a shared circuitry (Fig. 3). We will determine whether children with BECTS show abnormal sensory gating that impairs attention, further linking abnormalities in the thalamocortical circuit to the pathophysiology and cognitive deficits characteristic of this disease (Aim 2).

Abnormalities in the thalamocortical circuit in develop-mental epilepsy syndromes charact-erized by abundant spikes during NREM sleep were first suggested by a series of observational studies that found decreased thalamic volume and increased incidence of thalamic injury in these children.(Leal et al., 2018; Sánchez Fernández et al., 2012b, 2017) Work in BECTS using whole brain voxel-wise comparisons have suggested abnormal white matter microstruct-ure in the vicinity of the seizure onset zone.(Ciumas et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2014) Using an a priori approach, we showed that focal white matter microstructural abnormalities adjacent to the sensorimotor cortex (increased fractional anisotropy, FA), consistent with increased focal thalamocortical connectivity, correspond to decreased performance on a motor coordination task, the grooved pegboard task (Fig. 4).(Ostrowski et al., (in press)) In schizophrenia, we have demonstrated that subjects with reduced spindle density show increased thalamocortical functional connectivity in the sensorimotor cortex, consistent with failed inhibition of this circuit.(Baran et al., 2019) We will test for direct links between focal abnormalities in thalamocortical structural and functional connectivity to the sensorimotor cortex and abnormalities in spindles, gating and performance on motor learning and attention tasks in BECTS (Aim 2).

Spindles offer a novel treatment target for the cognitive deficits observed in BECTS. Confirming a therapeutic effect, interventions that increase spindle activity result in improved sleep dependent memory consolidation.28-32 Conversely, interventions that decrease sigma power (e.g., spindle frequencies) impair memory.33 The thalamocortical circuits that generate sleep spindles involve both GABAergic and glutamatergic channels. Both FDA-approved and off-label use of antiseizure medications in BECTS target GABAergic channels (e.g., clobazam, diazepam), pre-synaptic glutamate release through voltage-gated calcium and sodium channels (e.g., oxcarbazepine), activity on kainite receptors (e.g., topiramate) and post-synaptic NMDA glutamate receptors (e.g., perampanel(Barker-Haliski and White, 2015)). The impact of these pharmacologic interventions on thalamocortical electrophysiology required for normal cognitive processes (e.g., spindles and sensory gating) can thus be directly tested. We have developed a pipeline to evaluate treatments for spindle deficits using complementary human and rodent studies (R01MH092638). Consistent with observations that failed GABAergic inhibition contributes to spindle and sensory gating deficits,82,94 human studies have already demonstrated that the GABA agonist zolpidem increases spindle density and memory in human subjects.(Kaestner et al., 2013; Mednick et al., 2013) High dose treatment with diazepam is the current standard of care at our institution to treat children with CSWS and LKS. Thus, leveraging this clinical protocol is an efficient, economical opportunity to test the impact of a GABA agonist on spindles in BECTS cases complicated by CSWS or LKS (Aim 3). 
In addition to pharmacologic interventions, appropriately timed quiet auditory stimuli during sleep can also increase spindle activity(Leminen et al., 2017; Ngo et al., 2013; Weigenand et al., 2016) without causing awakening(Bellesi et al., 2014; Leminen et al., 2017; Ngo et al., 2013; Papalambros et al., 2017). The slow wave oscillations that are the hallmark of NREM sleep reflect synchronized cortical neuronal populations fluctuating between depolarized (“up”) and hyperpolarized (“down”) states.(Steriade et al., 1993, 2001) Acoustic stimulation delivered during the “up” state increases spindle activity and improves memory.(Leminen et al., 2017; Ngo et al., 2013; Weigenand et al., 2016) Closed-loop delivery of an auditory stimulus precisely timed with the up state of the slow wave oscillation(Fattinger et al., 2019; Ngo et al., 2013) can be achieved through real time EEG analysis. This approach was recently applied in a feasibility experiment in children with epilepsy, including 4 with BECTS and 2 with CSWS. This pilot feasibility study demonstrated that the children tolerated the acoustic stimulation during sleep and that the stimuli did not provoke clinical or non-convulsive electrographic seizures.(Fattinger et al., 2019) Importantly, closed-loop acoustic stimulation offers a scalable, affordable intervention that could ultimately be applied in the home environment. The proposed work will allow us to test the effect of improved spindles on motor learning in BECTS (Aim 3). 

Based on their biophysical characteristics, MEG and EEG are differentially sensitive to electrical currents derived from neural activity. Previous work evaluating spindles has shown that MEG and EEG provide complementary data for spindle detection.(Dehghani et al., 2010a, 2010b, 2011a, 2011b; Sharon et al., 2007) Only about 50% of spindles detected by MEG are also seen in EEG, while the converse also occurs 15% of the time.(Dehghani et al., 2011a) Spindles detected by MEG alone tend to have a focal onset and not to propagate across the cortex, and spindles detected in both modalities tend to appear earlier in MEG.(Irimia et al., 2012) In contrast, EEG is more likely to detect spindles from radial sources and spindles that rapidly cover extended areas on the cortex.  Source imaging techniques, which typically combine either EEG or MEG with anatomical MRI, provide accurate localization of cortical source activity with excellent temporal and spatial resolution.(Chu, 2015; Chu et al., 2015; Gramfort et al., 2014; Hamalainen and Sarvas, 1989; Michel et al., 2004; Song et al., 2019) Source analysis suggests impaired sensory gating involves the deficient functioning of multiple interconnected and temporally overlapping activated brain regions, including the sensorimotor cortex(Knott et al., 2009), and that source modeling significantly improves the reliability of sensory gating measures.(Lu et al., 2007) Source imaging techniques that combine EEG and MEG provide improved localization of both evoked potentials(Dale and Sereno, 1993; Hämäläinen et al., 1993; Liu et al., 2002; Luck et al., 2011) and spindles.(Shi et al., 2019) Using combined EEG/MEG source imaging, we have recently demonstrated that focal spindle increases in the motor cortex correlate with motor learning in healthy adults.(Shi et al., 2019) The sensitivity and precision afforded by this combination of EEG/MEG techniques is critical to the aims of this proposal.

As a common, stereotyped, focal, epilepsy syndrome with a known seizure focus, BECTS enables targeted study of a consistent region of interest across subjects to isolate focal structural and physiological abnormalities to relate to the motor and cognitive comorbidities. As a transient developmental syndrome with spontaneous epilepsy resolution obtained in all children, BECTS enables study across epilepsy and resolution to isolate transient abnormalities that co-occur during the active phase of the disease. Our natural history work in BECTS has confirmed that most children who remain seizure-free for 12 months have entered terminal epilepsy resolution, and the proportion who relapse decreases exponentially with increased duration seizure-free, validating the use of cross-sectional studies with duration seizure free as a proxy for disease state (Fig 5).(Berg et al., 2014; Ross et al., 2019; Song et al., 2019) Finally, as the severity of cognitive symptoms in BECTS varies, ranging from mild to profound symptoms, the relationship between aberrations in anatomy, physiology, and severity of clinical symptoms can be evaluated in BECTS.

We propose focal thalamocortical circuit dysfunction as a unified source of the electrophysiological features and motor and cognitive deficits in BECTS and a tractable target for treatment. Demonstration of a relationship between thalamocortical circuit abnormalities and neuropsychological deficits in this common disease will also provide a systematic approach to evaluate the role of this circuit in related epileptic encephalopathies.

Demonstration of the proposed Aims will dramatically shift clinical practice paradigms by introducing novel theoretical concepts, approaches, methodologies, biomarkers, and interventions for motor and cognitive dysfunction in BECTS and associated severe epileptic encephalopathies. Discovering a treatment for motor and cognitive deficits during the school age years would have a tremendous impact and substantially improve functional outcomes in BECTS and related childhood epilepsies.


The primary goal of our interdisciplinary proposal is to demonstrate the relationship between focal dysfunction in thalamocortical circuits and electrophysiology essential for learning and attention, and the motor and cognitive deficits observed in BECTS. The aims of this study are three-fold: Aim 1: to determine whether sensorimotor spindle deficits mediate impaired sleep-dependent memory consolidation of a motor task; Aim 2: to determine whether additional functional (e.g., sensory gating, functional connectivity, interictal spikes) and structural (e.g., white matter connectivity) disruptions to the thalamocortical circuit are interrelated and contribute to cognitive symptoms; and Aim 3: to determine whether treatment with: i) diazepam (leveraged as part of a standardized clinical care protocol) increases spindles, sensory gating and cognitive performance; and ii) closed-loop auditory neurostimulation increases spindles and motor learning in BECTS.
We will collect imaging and task data for the above Aims through three Experimental Protocols. For Aims 1 and 2 (Experiment 1), participants will spend 5.5 hours at the MGH Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging. On the visit day, subjects will undergo set up for EEG/MEG recordings following lunch. The session will start with motor sequence task (MST) training, followed by sensory gating, followed by a 2 hour nap opportunity. We chose to study a post-lunch nap because following lunch, there is a dip in the circadian rhythm making a nap feasible with sleep architecture resembling that of a night of sleep.(Monk, 2005) Prior work has shown that naps are sufficient to capture accurate spindle density relationships with the MST.(Nishida and Walker, 2007) We have already demonstrated that nap data are feasible to collect in the EEG/MEG scanner in children with BECTS and controls, and identified spindle density differences between groups using nap data (see Aim 1A, Preliminary Results). After napping, subjects will complete MST testing and the Conner’s Continuous Performance Test (CCPT; described in detail in section 4.6 below). Participants will then have the option to complete a 2 hour MRI that afternoon or return within 1 month for the MRI to allow for: i) source localization of sleep spindles constrained by individual participant anatomy and ii) characterization of thalamocortical connectivity (Fig 6). 
For Aim 3, we will conduct two complementary experiments. In Experiment 2, we will recruit children with BECTS plus CSWS or LKS who are being admitted to MGH for high dose diazepam treatment following our hospital’s standard clinical protocol (2 nights/3 days with treatment on day 2 and continuous EEG throughout the admission). On hospital day 1, participants will complete MST training and sensory gating prior to sleep. On hospital day 2, they will undergo MST testing in the morning and complete the CCPT. Subjects will then receive high dose diazepam treatment in the late afternoon. Following treatment, participants will undergo MST training with a new sequence and sensory gating prior to sleep. On hospital day 3, they will complete MST testing and CCPT in the morning. 
In Experiment 3, children with BECTS from Experiment 1 will return within 1 month of their first visit. We chose this follow up window based on evidence showing that EEG features in BECTS do not change over the course of ~4 weeks.(Tenney et al., 2016) Participants will spend 4.5 hours at the MGH Athinoula Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging. They will undergo MST training followed by a 2-hour nap opportunity during EEG/MEG recording. During the nap, they will receive closed-loop auditory stimulation. After sleep, subjects will complete MST testing. 


Automated detection algorithms allow reproducible, standardized analysis of spindles.(Warby et al., 2014) Our wavelet-based automated spindle detector has been validated in schizophrenia patients(Wamsley et al., 2012) and controls, and outperformed other automated detectors in a large study of healthy subjects.(Warby et al., 2014) Due to the impact of spikes on spectral power in the sigma band (e.g., spindle frequency),(Kramer et al., 2008) it was necessary to modify this algorithm for epilepsy research. To do so, we added to the detector an iterative procedure to detect and remove spikes incorrectly classified as spindles (see Fig. 1B for example detections). We validated this approach by hand counting spindles (the “gold standard”) in a subset of control and BECTS data (100s each, 19-channels, n= 6 active BECTS, n=6 resolving BECTS, n= 6 controls). We found that our modified detector improved sensitivity (p=7.3e-15) and positive predictive value (p=0.0015) compared to the existing method(Wamsley et al., 2012), with performance comparable to prior standards for automated detectors on control data.(Warby et al., 2014) Importantly, using this modified method, spikes are not incorrectly counted as spindles, and spikes do not artificially increase the spindle detection threshold, thus masking true spindles.

Visual analysis of BECTS EEG data suggests a focal deficit in spindles spatially and temporally coinciding with spikes (Fig 1B). Blinded hand counting of spindles in the data analyzed in Preliminary Result (1) above suggested a decrease in spindles in active BECTS compared to resolving BECTS (p=0.058) and controls (p=0.026). Application of our automated detector to a larger dataset of NREM EEG data from children with BECTS and controls (10 min each, 72 channels, n=10 active BECTS, n=10 resolving BECTS, n=13 controls) confirmed a focal decrease in spindle density in children with active BECTS compared to resolving BECTS (p=0.002) and controls (0.01) in the central electrodes (C3 and C4, the stereotyped focus of spikes in BECTS, Fig. 7). There was no difference between groups in spindle density measured from brain regions excluding central and temporal channels (p>0.1). We also found that spindle density in the central electrodes decreased exponentially with spike rate (p=0.004), suggesting a shared, non-linear, pathophysiologic mechanism between spikes and spindles. We further found that spindle density in the central electrode increased with duration seizure free (p=0.015), suggesting that spindle disruption resolves with epilepsy resolution. These data support the hypothesis that children with BECTS have a focal, transient disruption in spindles.

MST improvement requires sleep-dependent memory consolidation which is directly tied to spindle density.(Manoach and Stickgold, 2019; Manoach et al., 2004, 2016; Walker et al., 2002; Wamsley et al., 2012) We tested the MST in 6 children with BECTS and 2 controls before and after sleep EEG recordings. Our preliminary results show that children tolerate the MST and BECTS subjects had decreased sleep-dependent improvement compared to controls (11.1% vs 28.4%). 

Spindle density relates to cognitive performance in BECTS.  Analysis of data from children who underwent testing of motor coordination (grooved pegboard task, n=7 active BECTS, n=11 resolving BECTS, n=11 controls) and language skills (phonological awareness, n=6 active BECTS, n=8 resolving BECTS, n=11 controls) within one month of EEG, revealed a correlation between spindle density in the EEG electrode best corresponding to the hand sensorimotor region (CP2) and motor performance in the left hand (p=0.02) and between the electrode corresponding to the frontal language region (C5) and phonological awareness (p=0.03, Fig. 8). These data suggest that spindle disruptions correspond to motor and cognitive symptoms in BECTS, and motivate the hypothesis that focal spindle deficits result in deficient learning in BECTS.

Feasibility of sensory gating task in BECTS. We have tested sensory gating26 in 3 children with active BECTS and 1 child with focal lesional epilepsy due to a small cavernous malformation, each of whom tolerated the paradigm. The BECTS subjects showed deficient P50 sensory gating to the paired auditory stimulus (P50 ratios of 0.74±0.23). In contrast, the child with lesional epilepsy had a gating response similar to what has been reported in the literature for controls(Hall et al., 2011) (0.37, Fig. 9). This preliminary result suggests a disruption in the thalamocortical circuit in BECTS.

